<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>II</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-2" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</h3>
			<p>Every effort to get the ship off had proved unavailing; indeed, it might even be considered fortunate that the screw had not been broken by the tremendous effort required of it. The ship had not heeled over any more, however; and if the night were not stormy, they might lie here peaceably till the next morning, when a passing vessel could take off the passengers and carry them farther on their journey, if they had not got afloat before then, which, indeed, might happen at any moment.</p>
			<p>So spoke the Captain, whose coolness was undisturbed by the misfortune which his own obstinacy had caused.</p>
			<p>There was the fact that on the charts, by which he and every other captain had to steer, fifteen feet were marked at this place; and the gentlemen at the head of affairs might take the blame to themselves and provide better charts, or, at any rate, proper buoys. And if, as he very well knew, other captains had for years past avoided this shoal, and had preferred to go some miles out of their way, he had constantly since then, and even the day before yesterday, crossed this very spot. However, he had no objection to launching the large boat and landing the passengers, for them to get on their way afterwards as best they could.</p>
			<p>"The man is drunk or mad!" said the President, when the Captain had turned his broad back and retired to his post. "It is a sin and a shame that such a man should command a ship, even a mere tub; but I will have a strict inquiry held, and he shall receive exemplary punishment."</p>
			<p>The President's long thin person quivered with anger, fear, and cold; the General shrugged his shoulders.</p>
			<p>"That is all very fine and very well, my dear President," said he; "but it will come a little too late, and will not help us out of our awkward position. On principle, I never interfere in matters which I do not understand; but I wish we had some one on board who could advise us what to do. We must not ask the sailors--that would be encouraging insubordination. What do you want, Elsa?"</p>
			<p>Elsa had looked at him meaningly. He went up to her and repeated his question.</p>
			<p>"Ask that gentleman," said Elsa.</p>
			<p>"What gentleman?"</p>
			<p>"That one there; he is a sailor, he can certainly advise you best."</p>
			<p>The General fixed his sharp eyes upon the person designated.</p>
			<p>"Ah, that man," said he. "He really does look as if he might----"</p>
			<p>"Does not he?" said Elsa. "And he told me before that we should run aground."</p>
			<p>"Of course he does not belong to the ship?"</p>
			<p>"Oh no--at least, I think--but speak to him yourself."</p>
			<p>The General went up to the "Indefatigable."</p>
			<p>"I am told, sir, that you are a sailor."</p>
			<p>"I am."</p>
			<p>"Navigating officer?"</p>
			<p>"Merchant captain: Reinhold Schmidt."</p>
			<p>"My name is General von Werben. I should be much obliged to you, sir, if you would give me your opinion, as a sailor, upon our situation; of course in strict confidence. I should be sorry to ask you to give evidence against a comrade, or in any way to shake his authority, which we may still possibly stand much in need of. Is the captain, in your opinion, to blame for our mishap?"</p>
			<p>"Yes and no, General. No, because the charts by which, according to rule, we must be guided, show a channel in this place. The charts were right, too, till within the last few years. Since then there has been a great deal of silting up, and also, in consequence of the west wind which has prevailed for some weeks, the water has been constantly falling. More prudent men avoid this spot on that account. I, for my part, should have avoided it."</p>
			<p>"Good! And what do you think of our situation? Are we in danger? or are we likely to be in danger?"</p>
			<p>"I think not. The ship lies almost straight, and on smooth sand. If nothing new happens, it may lie so a long time."</p>
			<p>"The Captain is right, then, in keeping us on board?"</p>
			<p>"I think so; all the more that the wind, for the first time for days past, seems inclined to veer round to the east, and if that happens, we have good grounds for supposing that we shall be afloat again in a few hours. However----"</p>
			<p>"However?"</p>
			<p>"Man is liable to error, General. If the wind--it is south-east now; the thing is not likely, but it is possible--if the wind should get round to the west again, and blow harder, perhaps very hard, then there might be serious danger."</p>
			<p>"We ought, then, to take advantage of the Captain's permission to leave the ship?"</p>
			<p>"As the passage would be easy, and perfectly safe, I cannot at any rate advise against it; but then it should be done while there is still sufficient daylight: it would be best immediately."</p>
			<p>"And you? You would remain--of course?"</p>
			<p>"Of course, General."</p>
			<p>"Thank you."</p>
			<p>The General touched his cap with a slight bend of the head. Reinhold lifted his for a moment, returning the movement with a stiff bow.</p>
			<p>"Well?" asked Elsa, as her father came back to her.</p>
			<p>"The man must have been a soldier," answered the General.</p>
			<p>"Why so?" asked the President.</p>
			<p>"I wish I could always get such clear, explicit reports from my officers. The case stands thus."</p>
			<p>He repeated what he had just heard from Reinhold, and wound up by saying that he would speak to the Captain about the immediate disembarkation of such passengers as wished it.</p>
			<p>"For my part, I do not intend to put myself to such inconvenience, which may be unnecessary too, unless Elsa----"</p>
			<p>"I, papa!" cried Elsa, "I should not think of such a thing."</p>
			<p>The President was in much embarrassment. It was true that he had only that morning, on leaving Stettin, renewed a very slight former acquaintance with General von Werben; but now, after he had been in conversation with him all day, and had taken every opportunity of showing attentions to his daughter, he could not well do otherwise than declare, with a quiver of the lips, which was meant for a smile, that he would share with them as formerly the pleasures, so now the disagreeables of the journey. Should the worst come to the worst, the Prussian Government would be able to console itself for the loss of a president, who besides, as the father of six hopeful children, would have his name handed down to posterity, and could therefore make no claim upon the sympathy of his contemporaries.</p>
			<p>Notwithstanding his resigned words, the worthy official was very uncomfortable at heart. In secret he cursed his own inconceivable thoughtlessness in having trusted himself to a "tub," merely to be at home a day sooner, instead of waiting for the next day's mail-boat; he cursed the General's "stupid security," and the young lady's "coquettish affectation of courage," and when a few minutes later the large boat was really launched, and in an incredibly short time, as it seemed to him, filled with the happily small number of deck passengers, and a few ladies and gentlemen from the after-cabin, and at first with a few powerful strokes of the oars, and soon after with sails hoisted, made all speed to the shore, he sighed deeply, and firmly resolved, at whatever cost, even at that of a scornful smile from the young lady's lips, that he also would leave the ship before night.</p>
			<p>And night was approaching only too rapidly for his fears. The evening glow in the western sky was fading with every minute, and from the east, from the open sea, it grew darker and darker. How long would it be before the land, which to his short-sighted eyes already appeared only as an indistinct outline through the evening mists, would disappear altogether from his sight?</p>
			<p>And there could be no doubt, too, that the waves were rising higher every minute, here and there even for the first time that day showing crests of white foam, and breaking with ever-increasing force against the unlucky ship! Added to this the horrible creaking of the yards, the dismal howling of the wind in the rigging, the intolerable roaring and hissing of the steam, which was being almost incessantly let off from the overheated boiler! The boiler would blow up perhaps finally, and the shattered limbs of the man who but now was buttoning up his overcoat, would be sent flying hither and thither through the air.</p>
			<p>The President grew so hot at this idea that he unbuttoned his coat and then buttoned it up again as he was struck by the ice-cold wind.</p>
			<p>"It is unendurable!" muttered he.</p>
			<p>Elsa had long since observed how very little the President liked remaining on board ship, and that he had only made up his mind to it with evident unwillingness, out of consideration for his travelling companions.</p>
			<p>She had been maliciously amused at first with the embarrassment which he tried to conceal, but now her good-nature conquered. He was after all an elderly gentleman, and apparently not very strong, and a civilian! he could not of course be expected to have either the intrepid courage or the indifference to hardships of her father, who had not even put on his greatcoat yet, and was now taking his usual evening walk up and down the deck. But papa had made up his mind, once for all, to remain; it would be quite useless to try to persuade him to go. "<i>He</i> must devise some means!" said she to herself.</p>
			<p>Reinhold had disappeared after his last words with her father, and was not now on the after-deck; she went forward, therefore, and found him sitting on a great chest, looking through a pocket telescope towards the shore so intently that she had come close to him before he remarked her. He sprang hastily to his feet and turned towards her.</p>
			<p>"How far have they got?" asked Elsa.</p>
			<p>"They will land directly," he answered. "Will you look through this?"</p>
			<p>He handed her the glass. At the moment when she touched it the metal still retained some warmth from the hand which had held it. In general this was not at all a pleasant sensation to her, but on this occasion she did not perceive it. She thought of it for a moment as she tried to bring the spot which he pointed out to her within the focus of the glass.</p>
			<p>The attempt was unsuccessful; she could see nothing but undefined mist.</p>
			<p>"I would rather trust to my eyes!" cried she, putting down the telescope. "I can see it so, quite plainly, there close in shore--in the white streak. What is that?"</p>
			<p>"The surf."</p>
			<p>"What has become of the sail?"</p>
			<p>"It has been taken in so as not to have too much way on as they run in. But really you have a sailor's eye!"</p>
			<p>Elsa smiled at the compliment, and Reinhold smiled too. Their looks met, and remained turned upon each other.</p>
			<p>"I have a request to make to you," said Elsa, without dropping her eyes.</p>
			<p>"And I was about to make one to you," answered he, looking steadily into the brown stars which shone up towards him, "I wanted to ask you also to go on shore. We shall be afloat in an hour, but the night will be stormy, and we shall be obliged to anchor as soon as we have passed Wissow Head." He pointed to the promontory. "Under the best of circumstances the situation would not be pleasant, at the worst it might be very unpleasant. I should like to know that you were safe from either alternative."</p>
			<p>"Thank you," said Elsa, "and now my request need not be made;" and she told Reinhold why she had come.</p>
			<p>"That happens most fortunately," cried he, "but there is not a moment to lose. I will speak to your father immediately. We must go at once."</p>
			<p>"We?"</p>
			<p>"With your permission I will take you on shore myself."</p>
			<p>"Thank you," said Elsa again, with a deep breath. She held out her hand to him; he took the small delicate hand in his, and again their looks met.</p>
			<p>"That hand may be trusted," thought Elsa, "and the eyes too!" And aloud she said: "You must not think, however, that I am afraid of remaining here! it is really only on the poor President's account."</p>
			<p>She withdrew her hand, and hastened away towards her father, who was already surprised at her long absence, and now came in search of her.</p>
			<p>In the act of following her, Reinhold saw lying at his feet a little pale grey glove. She must have dropped it just now, as she took the telescope.</p>
			<p>He stooped quickly, picked it up, and put it in his pocket.</p>
			<p>"She will not have that back again," said he to himself.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
