<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>III</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-3" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</h3>
			<p>Philip had whispered to Reinhold that he would look him up presently; Reinhold trembled for the result of a meeting between father and son, which could not have occurred at a more unfortunate moment; but it could not be helped, and he determined to employ the interval in saying a few words of comfort, after the scene that had just taken place, to the old clerk whom he had spoken to several times during the last few days, and had learnt to look upon as certainly a peculiar but an excellent and upright man. He found the old man in the little arbour at the end of the narrow walk, between the garden and the building, in the upper story of which he and Anders lived. He was sitting quite broken down on the bench, while Cilli, who was with him, wiped the drops of perspiration from his brow. She recognised Reinhold’s step at once, and said, as he entered the arbour:</p>
			<p>“Thank God that you have come, sir! You were present. How did Herr Schmidt take my father’s confession? From what my father says, I conclude very badly.”</p>
			<p>“On the contrary, Fräulein Cilli, my uncle is of opinion that between two such old friends as himself and your father, a merely theoretic difference is of no consequence.”</p>
			<p>“But if it should not stop at theory,” exclaimed the old man, “if the practical consequences are carried out by everybody⁠—”</p>
			<p>“But not by you, my dear Herr Kreisel! Answer me one question: would you take advantage of any crisis in business to force from your employer an increase of salary?”</p>
			<p>“Never!” exclaimed the old man, “never!”</p>
			<p>“You see for yourself! Though you may be perfectly right in theory, between it and practice there lies, in the minds of educated people like yourself, a long and rough road, into which you will never enter, or on which, after the first few steps, you will stand still in horror.”</p>
			<p>“Ah! yes, my nerves!” murmured the old man; “my nerves are not strong enough for it. I am worn out; I believe he is right after all; an hour’s sleep would do me good.” He was persuaded by Reinhold and Cilli to go into the house; Reinhold went a little way with him; when he returned to the arbour, Cilli was sitting with her hands before her, and such an expression of deep sorrow and trouble on her pure, gentle face, that it went to Reinhold’s heart.</p>
			<p>“Dear little Cilli,” said Reinhold, sitting down by her and taking her hands in his “do not be so anxious. I give you my word that my uncle does not dream of parting with your father; matters remain between them exactly as before.”</p>
			<p>“Not exactly,” answered Cilli, shaking her head; “since Thursday my father has been quite changed. He has scarcely eaten or slept; and this morning, quite early, he came to my bedside and said that he had no longer any doubts, that he also was a Socialist, and he must tell Herr Schmidt. That was quite right, as we ought always to tell the truth, even in this case, when your uncle will not allow any Socialists on his works. And although, as you tell me, and I believed before, your uncle will make an exception in favour of my father, because he is old and feeble, my father is proud, and will not endure to be merely tolerated, all the more that he is undoubtedly in the right.”</p>
			<p>“How, my dear Cilli?” asked Reinhold, astonished. “Your father is in the right?”</p>
			<p>“Certainly he is,” answered Cilli warmly; “is it not wrong that even one man should suffer when others can prevent it? Did not Christ tell us to feed the hungry, to give drink to the thirsty, to clothe the naked, to comfort the oppressed and heavy-laden? And if Christ had not commanded it, does not every good man’s heart command it?”</p>
			<p>“In that case, my dear Cilli, all good men must be Socialists, and even I myself may lay claim to the title; but between the love of our neighbours, as you describe it, and Socialism as these people desire it, there is a wide difference.”</p>
			<p>“I see none,” said Cilli. Reinhold looked at the sightless eyes upraised with an expression of gentle enthusiasm.</p>
			<p>“I can well believe that you do not see it, poor child,” he said to himself.</p>
			<p>“And on that point I am quite easy,” continued the blind girl; “men must live up to their convictions, and bear the consequences patiently. And my father and I can do so the more easily, that at the worst we shall not have to bear them long.”</p>
			<p>“What do you mean, dear Cilli?”</p>
			<p>“I know that my father will not live long; the doctor has always feared that he would sink under one of his nervous attacks; and once, when he was very bad, he told me so, that I might be prepared. I am prepared. And if my father could only believe that I should not outlive him long, he would be more easy in his mind. He thinks so much of you; perhaps he would believe you if you assured him of it.”</p>
			<p>“But how can I, dear Cilli?”</p>
			<p>“Because it is only the truth. I am ill; dying of a nervous illness. My blindness, which came on when I was three years old, is only the result of this disease, which I doubtless inherited from my father. When I was eight years old, and had a very bad illness, my parents called in two doctors, and one said to the other as they went out⁠—they said it in a whisper, and probably did not intend me to hear, but they did not know how sharp my hearing is⁠—it would be a miracle if the child lived to be sixteen. I shall be sixteen next spring, and⁠—I do not believe in miracles.”</p>
			<p>“Doctors often make mistakes; I hope they have made one in your case.”</p>
			<p>“I do not hope it⁠—I do not wish it.”</p>
			<p>“But you love life.”</p>
			<p>“Only because I know that I must die soon, as you all say that I think the world so beautiful only because I am blind. And when my dear father is gone, whom shall I have to live for?”</p>
			<p>“For your friends⁠—myself, for example; for Justus, whom you love, and who loves you.”</p>
			<p>“Who loves me?” The blind girl’s sweet mouth quivered. She drew two or three deep breaths, but the tears would not be kept back; they streamed from the poor blind eyes, and trickled through the slender white fingers with which she tried to hide them.</p>
			<p>“Cilli! Cilli! what is the matter?” exclaimed Reinhold, seized with a painful foreboding.</p>
			<p>“Nothing, nothing,” murmured the blind girl. “You see yourself that I am ill⁠—very ill. Hark! whose is that strange step in the courtyard?” Reinhold looked up and recognised Philip, who came rapidly along the walk in search of him without looking into the arbour. He could not bear the idea of being found here by Philip at this moment, he must therefore make up his mind to leave Cilli, who herself implored him to go.</p>
			<p>“Leave me! leave me! before you I am not ashamed of my tears. You alone may see me weep.” It was high time. Philip had already turned back and came towards him.</p>
			<p>“Where the devil have you been? I have been looking for you in your room, and all over the place.”</p>
			<p>“Your interview with your father cannot have lasted long.” Philip laughed bitterly.</p>
			<p>“As if it were possible to talk to him! But I swear this shall be the last time. No man in the world would endure it if he were a hundred times his father.” Philip was furious; he stormed at his father’s blindness and obstinacy. From what he could gather about the course of the interview, Reinhold could not quite justify his uncle, but he could not let pass the outrageous expressions of which the angry man made use.</p>
			<p>“Are you going to begin now?” exclaimed Philip. “It is partly your fault. All that the old man said was only what you said to me yourself yesterday. What in the world induced you to set him against a project of which neither of you understand a word? He, in spite of his knowledge of business; you, in spite of your seamanship. What does it signify to you whether the harbour is east or north? Whether it is choked up in one place or goes to the devil in the other? Do you intend to invest your money in it? If others wish to do so, let them. Everyone can use his own eyes, and if he comes to grief it is his own lookout. The best of it is that none of you who set your faces against it can hinder the matter from coming to a conclusion; in fact, it is as good as concluded now. Count Golm has joined the Provisional Board; and it would be a good joke if a harbour on the east were decided upon, and Golm and the daughter of our principal opponent, General Werben, who is as obstinate as my father⁠—good heavens! there is young Werben! I hope he did not hear!” This conversation had taken place while they walked up and down between the blocks of marble in the courtyard. Ottomar had learnt at the house from Grollman that Reinhold was in the courtyard, and now came suddenly towards him from behind one of the blocks. He had heard nothing, although Reinhold feared at first that he had from his gloomy and embarrassed air. But his handsome young face cleared the next minute; he held out his hand to him with the greatest cordiality, and then to Philip with less cordiality.</p>
			<p>“He had been meaning to come every day, but the worries of military duty! Quite unbearable, my dear fellow! You have no conception what it is; you, especially, my dear Schmidt; you never were in the army, for reasons best known to the doctors. If I had a hand in the matter you should serve your time yet in the Guards. But what brought me here in this hand-over-head fashion was to bring you this invitation from my father and the ladies, with a thousand excuses, but the card had somehow been mislaid yesterday; for this evening⁠—quite a small party⁠—a good many officers, of course, a few ladies, of course also. There will be a little dancing, my sister says, who counts upon you. Of course you dance; and my father, as he told me yesterday, wants very much to talk to you on important matters of which I know nothing; some question about the harbour, I fancy. You see it is absolutely necessary that you should accept. You will accept?”</p>
			<p>“With much pleasure.”</p>
			<p>“That is capital.” Ottomar had during the last few words completely turned his back on Philip; he now turned round.</p>
			<p>“It will not be quite so lively as it was the other day at your house, my dear Schmidt; it was quite delightful. I heard from Golm that there was no end of a row afterwards, and the ladies were quite off their heads. So sorry I could not come; but I had a fearful headache; and headache, champagne, and pretty girls I have never yet been able to stand in that order, though in the reverse order I have suffered from them only too often.”</p>
			<p>“Bertalda was in despair,” said Philip, who was inwardly greatly irritated at the offhand manner of the young guardsman.</p>
			<p>“Dear little thing!” said Ottomar, shrugging his shoulders. “She says just what comes into her head. She is a jolly little girl. I hope Golm will behave well to her. But is not Herr Anders’ studio in this courtyard? His Satyr with the young Bacchus⁠—or is it Cupid?⁠—has made a tremendous sensation. I have never been in a sculptor’s studio; would it be too much, my dear fellow, to ask you to get me admitted?” Reinhold was quite willing. Philip remarked carelessly that if the other gentlemen had no objection he would take the opportunity of inquiring about the four marble statues which he had ordered of Anders for his staircase, and of which two must be finished by this time. He had inwardly hoped that Ottomar would be impressed by “the four marble statues.” Ottomar did not even appear to have heard him. He walked on in front, with his arm in Reinhold’s, to whom he spoke in so low a tone that Philip could not hear what he said, probably was not meant to hear.</p>
			<p>“Generous to remind me of it⁠—a <i xml:lang="fr">petit souper</i>⁠—in honour of Count Golm, who appears to be very susceptible of such ovations⁠—slipped in quite by chance⁠—came away immediately. Don’t say anything about it.”</p>
			<p>“Can you suppose⁠—”</p>
			<p>“One drops a word sometimes without thinking of it⁠—and it arouses suspicion⁠—the ladies and⁠—<i xml:lang="fr">ces dames!</i>⁠—a very different matter, thank goodness! My sister⁠—your cousin⁠—had the honour casually a few days ago. Should be in despair if a word⁠—the young lady is an artist, my sister tells me. One can hardly picture to oneself an artist, and a lady artist. After you, I beg!” Reinhold, who knew by experience that in consequence of the noise of hammers and chisels in Justus’s studio, a knock at the door was seldom heard, had gone before and opened the door at once, and had got some way into the room before he saw, in a corner before a cast at which Justus was working, the latter standing with Ferdinanda. Ottomar and Philip had followed him so quickly, that they had all got into the middle of the large room before the two, who were engaged in earnest conversation and bewildered by the noise around them, heard them come in, till Justus’s Lesto⁠—a shaggy little monster, of whom it was difficult to tell which was his head and which was his tail⁠—flew with a loud bark at Philip, whose polished boots seemed to arouse his wrath. In the tumult caused by this bold attack⁠—while Philip, fearing for his trousers, took refuge on a stool, and Justus, nearly dying of laughter, vainly called “Lesto! Lesto!” and the four or five assistants, with Antonio amongst them, moved a few obstacles out of the way, and brought chairs⁠—Reinhold had not noticed the deep blush that overspread Ferdinanda’s beautiful face when she perceived Ottomar, and the embarrassment with which the latter greeted her. By the time the confusion was somewhat allayed, and Lesto had subsided into quiet, the two had recovered their presence of mind, and the more easily that the first glance that passed between them was one of reconciliation. He had returned to her after three long anxious days, which she had passed in longing and despair. Now all was made up⁠—all was forgiven and forgotten. After the first happy and tremulous glance, she had not again looked at him, and was now chatting with Reinhold and Philip; but to Ottomar, the fact that she remained, that she did not after the first greeting retire into her studio, the door of which stood open, was an infallible proof of her penitence perhaps, certainly of her love. And then the full, somewhat deep tone of her voice⁠—he seemed to hear it for the first time; and he did hear it for the first time. Till today they had only exchanged hasty whispered words. Her laugh⁠—he had never thought that she could laugh⁠—it seemed to him a very miracle; her figure, whose classical form appeared more beautiful in the straight, clinging, grey working dress than it could have done in the most coquettish attire; the rich brown hair, drawn simply back from her brows and loosely knotted together low down in her neck⁠—he had never known how beautiful she was! He stood before finished and unfinished works⁠—they might have been the slides of a magic-lantern; he spoke to one and the other, chatted and joked; he had no idea what he said or what they answered; he was in a dream⁠—a sweet and delicious dream⁠—but for a few minutes only; then he awoke to a sense of the situation in which he found himself⁠—a situation which he could hardly have wished more favourable, and the advantages of which he was determined to profit by with rapid soldier-like courage and rashness. And Ferdinanda was also dreaming the sweet, delicious dream of happy love, while she chatted and laughed with the others; only she never forgot or mistook the danger of the situation. From Reinhold, Justus, and Philip she feared nothing; a little prudence, a little clever acting, would suffice to protect her from any shadow of suspicion as far as they were concerned. But what prudence, however cunning, what acting, however clever, would protect her from Antonio’s gleaming black eyes? It was true, he had returned to his work in the farthest corner of the room, and hammered and chiselled away, apparently quite unconcerned with anything that passed around him. But this very quietness, which was only apparent, alarmed her a thousand times more than if his glittering eyes had been continually upon her. What he did not see he heard. She knew the incredible sharpness of his senses; if he did not look round before, he would do so at the moment which she saw approaching. And that moment had come. Ottomar, thinking himself safe, approached her and whispered a word that she did not understand, so low was it breathed. But what matter? She read it in his eyes, on his lips: “I must speak to you alone⁠—in your studio!” But how was it to be managed? The moments were passing; there was so much to be seen in Justus’s studio, and the talk seemed endless. There were the four life-sized allegorical figures for Philip’s staircase.</p>
			<p>“Trade, a bearded man of Oriental appearance and dress, calling to mind Nathan on his journey home. Industry, as you will perceive, rather vaguely represented by a female figure of the present day, with some half-dozen emblems, which may mean anything you please⁠—all possible things⁠—exactly as Industry herself makes everything possible out of all possible things. This Greek youth, gentlemen, with his winged sandals and hat, may be recognised at any distance as the genius of railroads, as Hermes, if he had lived long enough, would undoubtedly have been appointed Postmaster-General in Olympus. The tall, beautiful, stately lady, in the dress of a Nuremberg lady of rank of the fifteenth century, will be recognised by the mural crown on her head and the square and level in her hand, as patroness of architecture⁠—a neat allusion to the suburban streets which the worthy possessor has had to pull down, in order to build for himself in the middle of the town the house the vestibule of which these masterpieces are to adorn.”</p>
			<p>“You are responsible for at least half a street, Anders!” cried Philip, laughing.</p>
			<p>“Ah!” said Justus, “that is the reason then that the lady looks so gloomy and melancholy under her mural crown! I could not imagine what was the meaning of the expression that, without my intending it⁠—and even against my will⁠—would come out clearer and clearer; the good lady has a pang of conscience which I ought to have had! Will anyone say now that we do not bestow our best heart’s blood on our creations?”</p>
			<p>“This last figure strikes me as being particularly beautiful, if I may venture to make an observation on a matter on which I am profoundly ignorant,” said Ottomar, with a glance at Ferdinanda, who strikingly resembled the lady with the mural crown, both in figure and in the haughty expression of the features. Justus, who had caught the glance, laughed. “You are not so ignorant as you pretend, Herr von Werben! You appear to know very well where we get our inspirations. But that you may see that other people can not only inspire forms, but also create very beautiful ones⁠—may we, Fräulein Ferdinanda?” and Justus pointed to the door of her studio.</p>
			<p>“Certainly,” said Ferdinanda, while her heart beat fast. Now or never was the time. Antonio had not looked round; perhaps he had not heard. It might be possible to go in with Ottomar while the others lingered behind. And so it happened. Philip and Reinhold were disputing about one of the symbols assigned to Trade; Philip, annoyed and irritated by the contradiction that met him on all sides today, in a loud, excited voice. Justus, however, was following her and Ottomar closely. As she got to the door, she turned and whispered to him, “Philip is unbearable today; do try and make peace between them?” Justus answered, “Oh! it means nothing,” but turned back. Ferdinanda entered quickly, followed by Ottomar. She walked a few steps to the left, till she was quite concealed from those in the other studio. Her arms encircled him, while she felt his arms around her. Their lips met, while he tasted the sweetness of her first kiss.</p>
			<p>“This evening?”</p>
			<p>“As you will.”</p>
			<p>“Eight o’clock, in the Bellevue Gardens!”</p>
			<p>“As you will.”</p>
			<p>“Darling!”</p>
			<p>“Darling!” They did not venture on a second kiss, fortunately, as Justus appeared, bringing with him, for greater security, the disputants. They stood before the “Reaper,” while Justus explained that it had been begun in the spring and intended at first for a pendant to the kneeling “Roman Shepherd Boy” in the Exhibition⁠—a girl, who, in the solitude of her maize field, deep in the Campagna, hears the Ave Maria ring out from the neighbouring convent, and who, laying aside her sickle and her sheaf, folds her hands for a moment in prayer; that the figure was nearly completed, attitude, gesture and expression, all quite admirable, and would have done honour to the greatest sculptors; that the greatest sculptors in Berlin had expressed their admiration; the Milanese Enrico Braga, who had been there on a visit in the summer, was quite overpowered. “And now, gentlemen, I ask you whether it is possible for any woman, even the most gifted, to carry out persistently a clearly defined aim! The statue is almost finished, only a few touches are wanted, but those touches are not given; we are not in the vein, we will wait for a more favourable day. One, two months pass, the day does not come; the clay dries up in the most unfortunate manner, breaks and splits everywhere⁠—we have lost all inclination for the work. I had made up my mind, at the risk of the deepest displeasure, to have the ‘Reaper’ secretly cast at night before it quite fell to pieces; when about four weeks ago, one fine morning, I entered the studio⁠—the sweet, dreamy face, was changed into a Medusa head, whose terrible eyes, under the hand that had in the meantime been laid on her brow, stared into the distance, apparently expecting someone. I should not like to be that someone. Would you, Captain?” Reinhold nodded to the sculptor; the statue had made exactly the same curiously mingled impression upon him, and he had almost expressed it in the same words. He said, smiling: “No, indeed!”</p>
			<p>“Put it to the vote!” exclaimed Justus eagerly. “Would you, Herr von Werben?” Ottomar did not answer. The work was begun in the spring; in the spring he had exchanged the first tender love-tokens with Ferdinanda; then had ensued a long, weary interval, during which she had altogether avoided him; and though four weeks ago she had given way to his imploring glances and resumed again their secret understanding, it had acquired in the interval a totally different character; a gloomy, passionate character, from which even he sometimes shrank. Was this the image of her love? Was it he who was here waited for? All this passed through his brain with the speed of lightning, but his fixed glance had betrayed something of what was in his mind.</p>
			<p>“Why say so much about it?” exclaimed Ferdinanda; “a work that must be put to the vote is not worthy to exist.” She had seized the heavy mallet which lay on the table amongst her other tools and swung it towards the statue. Justus caught hold of her arm.</p>
			<p>“Are you mad, Fräulein Ferdinanda? Cannot you understand a joke? I swear to you that it was only a joke! That I admire it even more than the former one! That you have surpassed yourself and me.” Justus was quite pale with excitement; the others hastened to assure her that they were quite of the master’s opinion, that they thought the statue surpassingly beautiful, that they did not wish to see one feature altered. Ottomar was foremost with his praises, and his beautiful eyes entreated for forgiveness; but Ferdinanda was not to be appeased.</p>
			<p>“It is too late,” she said, “the sentence has gone forth, and I am too proud, I confess, to accept praise which comes as an afterthought. Calm yourself, Anders; I will not destroy the statue, but I will never finish it, that I swear!”</p>
			<p>“And I am to be calm?” exclaimed Justus; “may I break stones in the road if I do, if I⁠—what is it, Antonio?” Antonio had entered, whispered a few words to Anders and then retired; as he went out he cast a gloomy look at the statue of the “Reaper.”</p>
			<p>“A gentleman from the committee,” said Anders, “there is always somebody coming; they will drive me wild. I will be back directly.” He hurried into his studio; Ottomar suggested that they had already troubled the young lady too long: he expected that Ferdinanda would press them to stay, but she did not; he bowed. “I hope, Ferdinanda,” said Reinhold, “that you will not distress us, I mean all of us, by carrying out your threat and leaving the statue unfinished.”</p>
			<p>“If you knew me better,” said Ferdinanda, “you would know that I always keep my word to myself and to others.” These last words she had, as if accidentally, addressed to Ottomar, and accompanied it with a glance which Ottomar understood and returned. Whatever became of the “Reaper,” she would come that evening. The door had closed behind the gentlemen; Ferdinanda bolted it and then turned slowly round. Her fixed glance rested first on the spot where she had kissed Ottomar for the first time, and then passed on to the “Reaper.” Was it an effect of light, or was it that others’ words had first made it plain to her what she had produced? A shudder passed through her.</p>
			<p>“I keep my word when I have given it⁠—but I wish I had not given it!”</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
