<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>VII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="book-2" id="chapter-2-7" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VII</h3>
			<p>Reinhold had not smiled, but as the fair vision disappeared in the shadow of the entrance he passed the hand which she had held so long over his eyes.</p>
			<p>“And you thought you knew how to love!” said he to himself. “What are our purest, holiest aspirations when compared with the heavenly purity and goodness of such a mind as this poor blind girl’s, who is as unconscious of her beauty and her charm as are the lilies of the field? How could so lovely a flower have blossomed here?”</p>
			<p>He looked around. The bell which had summoned the workpeople to their breakfast as Cilli came out of the house rang again. The men returned to their work. Looking round the corner of the house, he had a peep through the wide-open doors of the workshops, which seemed to occupy the whole of the ground-floor. Crosses and tombstones were being chiselled and carved by busy hands.</p>
			<p>A chill came over Reinhold, to see this sad, gloomy sight just now, when the world lay so bright before him, lighted up by the fancies of the blind girl who lived over these melancholy workshops, and in whose dreams the tapping and knocking of these dreadful hammers and chisels must mingle!</p>
			<p>He asked for his uncle. No one had seen him that morning; he might be in the engine-room or in some of the back yards. Where was Herr Anders’ studio? Here in this very building, the first door round the corner; the second was the young lady’s studio.</p>
			<p>Reinhold walked round the house and knocked at the first door, near which was a high window half shaded from within. No one answered, and he was going on when the door opened a little way. But it was not the friendly countenance of the sculptor, with its bright eyes and cheery smile, that met him, but a strange, dark face, from which a pair of black, sparkling eyes glared at him.</p>
			<p>“Beg pardon! I expected to see Herr Anders.”</p>
			<p>“Herr Anders is not here; he is in his own house, the third door upstairs.”</p>
			<p>He of the dark complexion said this in a forbidding tone and in German, which, though fluent enough, betrayed the foreigner in every syllable.</p>
			<p>“Then I will go and look for him there.”</p>
			<p>“Herr Anders is going to the Exhibition; he is dressing.”</p>
			<p>Reinhold now observed that the young man himself was in the act of dressing and still in his shirtsleeves, whose extreme whiteness made the darkness of his complexion even more remarkable. The interruption of his toilette quite explained the unfriendly tone of his answers, and the want of hospitality that made him hold the door only just enough open for him to speak to the stranger.</p>
			<p>“Perhaps you know whether Fräulein Schmidt is in her studio?”</p>
			<p>The pertinacity of the question seemed to irritate the young man. The black brows frowned heavily, the delicate upper lip with its slight moustache curled sufficiently to show the white teeth for a moment. “<i xml:lang="it">Non lo so</i>,” he blurted out.</p>
			<p>He shut the door, muttering between his teeth something else in Italian which did not sound like a blessing.</p>
			<p>Reinhold felt convinced that Ferdinanda was in her studio, and that the ungracious youth knew it; but at the same time it would not make her very unhappy if he paid his visit later, or did not pay it at all. At all events he must look for his uncle first.</p>
			<p>He returned to the yard, passing a place where huge blocks of marble were being cut through by the aid of large suspended saws, each of which was regulated by a man. It must have been fatiguing work, requiring great strength, and indeed was only undertaken when the machinery could not turn out enough work, as was now the case; there was no doubt that the machine certainly could do much more. So said the workman, taking the opportunity to get a little breathing-time. The steam saws were in that building; they had just seen the master go there. But Uncle Ernst was not near the steam saws, he had just been there; perhaps he was in the lathe-room close by.</p>
			<p>Reinhold had some difficulty in taking in the words which a workman shouted in his ear, so loud was the screeching, overpowering noise of the immense saws as the steam power drove them backwards and forwards with inconceivable rapidity through great blocks of marble as high as a man; eight, ten, and twelve saws working at once through the same block and cutting it into as many inch-thick slabs. And between each two blocks was a man upon a small platform incessantly busied in throwing water, mixed with sand from a pail, upon the sparks caused by the saws; and the one who had got down to answer Reinhold sprang hurriedly back to his place to extinguish the sparks which now came from his block in trails almost a yard in length.</p>
			<p>In the next room which Reinhold entered a less awful noise was going on. Though here, too, was heard the rattle of the driving bands as they stretched like interminable snakes from a wheel in one corner of the ceiling to another at the other end, and so descended to a second at a medium height, and once more went up and down in bewildering quivering lines; and here again wheels rattled and clattered, and the iron strained and screeched and creaked as it cut through the marble, boring holes, cutting with chisels, filing, shaving, scraping, and in every possible way converting it into skilful and sometimes even artistic forms. Entablatures with sharp plinths, slender fluted columns, elegant pedestals for candelabra or vases, even vases themselves which, rapidly revolving, were polished by busy hands with pumice stone.</p>
			<p>Herr Schmidt had been here a few minutes ago⁠—was perhaps now upstairs in the workshops where the fine work was done before it came here to be polished.</p>
			<p>Those workshops lay on the opposite side of the yard, so that Reinhold now first obtained a true idea of the dimensions of the establishment as well as of the enormous extent of the business. He had already been into three workshops, and had glanced into as many more in passing. What an amount of capital must be sunk in these massive buildings, and in the ground alone which was taken up by them and the yard, and in these complicated ingenious machines, and in the already completed goods, and again in these masses of rough marble which lay about all over the yard, and between which ran the paved road for the strongly-built wagons, upon which the powerful horses dragged these enormous weights backwards and forwards.</p>
			<p>And all this was done by the man of whom Aunt Rikchen had rightly said that he ought to understand the feelings of a person who has learnt nothing in his youth! This man who as a boy and youth had with his father gone up and down the Havel and the Spree in the great boat which was the only property of the family, till after the old man’s death he had started a business in bricks and sandstone in the lonely spot above the town, in the modest little house where Reinhold had visited him ten years ago.</p>
			<p>What industry, what energy and what intelligence had been brought to bear, to attain such a result, to create a world out of nothing! Was it to be wondered at if he who had created it carried his head higher than other men; or if this head, which had so much and so many to think of, to consider and to care for, were often shadowed by heavy clouds?</p>
			<p>Loud voices, which sounded close to Reinhold, startled him out of these meditations, a high one and a deep one, in which he thought he recognised his uncle’s. A dispute must be going on. The high voice got gradually louder, till a thundering “Silence!” stopped the flow. It could only be Uncle Ernst thus thundering.</p>
			<p>He stood still, uncertain whether to go nearer or to avoid the disputants. They however came round the great blocks of marble which he had just been looking at, his uncle and a red-haired man, whose ugly face was distorted and inflamed with anger. On his uncle’s forehead, too, from which the broad-brimmed hat was pushed back, lay a red angry cloud, but his large powerful eyes had a calm and steady look, and his voice, too, was calm and steady as now seeing his nephew, he said:</p>
			<p>“Good morning, Reinhold, though it is not a good morning for me.”</p>
			<p>“Do you require my presence any longer, Herr Schmidt?” asked the man.</p>
			<p>“Certainly. You will dismiss the people in my presence.”</p>
			<p>“That I shall not do, Herr Schmidt.”</p>
			<p>“In my presence, and in that of all the others. Sound the bell!”</p>
			<p>And Uncle Ernst pointed to a small platform over which hung a great bell.</p>
			<p>“That is not my office,” said the overseer hotly.</p>
			<p>“True,” answered Uncle Ernst, “for from this moment you no longer hold any office.”</p>
			<p>“I claim a quarter’s notice.”</p>
			<p>“That we shall soon see.”</p>
			<p>Uncle Ernst went up to the bell; Reinhold stepped before him.</p>
			<p>“Let me,” said he.</p>
			<p>He did not wait for his uncle’s answer, and pulled the rope that hung down; immediately the mighty clang of the great clapper sounded through the yard, overpowering and drowning the screeching and shrieking of the saws, the tapping and knocking of hammers and chisels, and startling the workmen at their work. Presently they emerged from all sides with anxious faces.</p>
			<p>While they assembled and stood in groups as they came from the workshops to the number of about two hundred, so Reinhold thought. Uncle Ernst stood leaning against a block of marble with folded arms, staring straight in front of him; a few steps from him stood the overseer, now very pale, and in whose alarmed and anxious looks it was easy to see that fear alone kept him in his place.</p>
			<p>Reinhold had come up to the side of the block upon which his uncle was leaning so as to be near him in any case. Whatever was the matter it was certainly nothing pleasant, and as his glance fell upon the people, he noticed several desperate and even wild faces.</p>
			<p>And now Uncle Ernst stood erect; the great eyes flashed over the assembled crowd, the arms fell from his broad breast, and from that broad breast came the mighty voice like thunder:</p>
			<p>“Men, you know the rules of this establishment; they are all put before you, before each of you that enters my service; they are hung up in every workshop; no one can say that anything is not clear or is difficult to understand, and they shall be kept, as by me the employer, so by you the employed. If there is one amongst you who can come forward here and say that I have diverged one hair’s breadth from what I promised you, or that I have in the smallest degree not fulfilled my duty and obligation, let him come forward and say so.”</p>
			<p>He paused, crossed his arms again, and looked down, as though he would not intimidate anyone by his glance, but left them free to express an opinion. Reinhold saw that here and there a few heads collected together, and several quick secret glances were exchanged from one group which he had noticed before. A man stepped forward, but the others held him by the arm, and he went back. Uncle Ernst looked up again.</p>
			<p>“No one has come forward; I must assume that you have nothing to say against me, that you have no grounds of complaint. I, however⁠—I have grounds of complaint against some of you, and that you may all hear what it is, and who it is, and may behave accordingly in the future, and that any man who is secretly following in the same way may know how to behave if he is otherwise an honest man, is why I call you together now. Jacob Schwarz, Johann Brand, Anton Baier, stand forward!”</p>
			<p>A considerable agitation arose amongst the people; all eyes were directed towards the group which Reinhold had already noticed. The same man came forward again decidedly, and looked behind him, whereupon two others followed hesitatingly.</p>
			<p>“What is it?” said the first.</p>
			<p>“You will soon know,” said Uncle Ernst. “You know all of you that our rules forbid you to belong to any union; that I might have sent away these three on the spot when I found out what they were about a week ago, and that I allowed mercy to take the place of justice in not sending them away, but giving them time for consideration. Yesterday evening the time of grace expired; they did not give Herr Roller the required assurance yesterday evening that they had left the union. Herr Roller ought not to have allowed them to return to their work; he did do so and is consequently henceforth no longer your overseer, and is dismissed absolutely from my service.”</p>
			<p>There was a movement amongst the crowd; consternation was depicted on most faces, malicious satisfaction on many; the overseer attempted a scornful smile, but got no further than a sickly grin.</p>
			<p>“You,” continued Uncle Ernst, for the first time turning to the culprits, “take your things and leave the yard at once! And you others, let this serve as a warning to you and a reminder of what, indeed, you must all have known long ago, that I am not to be trifled with, and that when I say a thing I mean it⁠—and now go back to your work!”</p>
			<p>A good many of the men turned at once and began to disperse; but others⁠—a few from almost every group⁠—remained, and as the ranks thinned drew closer together, as if to afford each other protection. Those too who had moved away at first now stopped again, turned back, and also drew together, so that in a few minutes the throng was divided into two parts; the last mentioned, who for the present were more amenable and conciliatory, were by far the larger number; but the others⁠—of whom there might be about thirty, were evidently the bolder and more determined. Reinhold moved to his uncle’s side.</p>
			<p>“What are you waiting for?” asked Uncle Ernst, “what do you want?”</p>
			<p>From the group of malcontents who had now clustered thickly together, a man stepped forward, not one of the three; a young man who would have been handsome if his youthful countenance had not been marred and distorted already by evil passions. His pale, bold eyes had a watery look, as if he were already too much addicted to the bottle. He waved his hand as if he were standing on a platform to speak, and with great fluency began:</p>
			<p>“We wish to know, Herr Schmidt, why we should not be socialists and communists too, if we choose; who is to forbid us to enter the ranks of the army of workers who are marching against the hardhearted middle classes to win back the rights which are so shamefully withheld from us? We wish to know⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Silence!” thundered Uncle Ernst; “silence, wretched boy! and blush for shame if you have any shame left in you!” Uncle Ernst advanced a few steps, and the lad retreated before him like a jackal before the lion, and slunk back into the knot of men which had drawn still closer together. “What are you standing there for, laying your heads together and muttering and threatening? Do you think that I fear you any more than I fear this wretched boy, whom I took from the streets, and clothed, and fed, and sent to school, and who wants to know now why I withhold his rights from him! His rights? Your rights? To keep honestly to what you have promised, what you have pledged yourselves to by your own signatures, that is your right⁠—neither more nor less! Who forced you to sign your names?”</p>
			<p>“Hunger!” cried a rough voice.</p>
			<p>“You lie, Carl Peters!” cried Uncle Ernst; “and if you did suffer hunger it was because you are a sot and carry the money which belongs to your wife and children to the gin palace.”</p>
			<p>“We are all socialists, every man of us!” called another voice from the crowd.</p>
			<p>“Then you are all liars and cheats, every man of you!” cried Uncle Ernst. “You lied when you signed your names to what you knew you would not and could not keep! You have cheated me every day and every hour that you worked for me, when you knew that I would not tolerate in my house or my yards anyone who is pledged to your insane principles; but that I would drive them out of my house or my yard as I do now all of you that stand there!”</p>
			<p>A sullen murmur sounded through the crowd, and some single loud threatening shouts were heard. Uncle Ernst sprang with one bound straight in front of the knot of men.</p>
			<p>“Be off with you!” he thundered; “be off with you at once!”</p>
			<p>The foremost fell back upon those who stood behind them. Evidently no one had courage to proceed to action. They gave way gradually; the knot began to separate.</p>
			<p>“Be at the office in half an hour to be paid off!”</p>
			<p>The men were gone and the overseer with them. Uncle Ernst turned to Reinhold.</p>
			<p>“There is a specimen for you of your fine Prussian discipline, which impressed you so greatly during the war; there is an instance of the last new German truth and honesty as it is learned in Bismarck’s school.”</p>
			<p>“But uncle, excuse me, what has Bismarck to do with all this?”</p>
			<p>“What has he to do with it?” Uncle Ernst stood still. “What has he to do with it? Who was it who gave the rule that might came before right? Or, if he did not say it, who gave such effect to it in his actions that the accursed maxim has become the leading principle with men nowadays, on which they regulate their conduct⁠—both active and passive? Who has taught our good simple folk how a man may live in perpetual conflict with those whom it has chosen as its representatives, and grasp at his objects over the heads of these representatives?⁠—how an army of followers may be created, and a docile party say ‘Amen’ to everything, or say anything else that is needed to attain these objects? Did you not hear what was said about the army of workers? That is no longer the mad dream of some crackbrained enthusiast. It is a reality, which is increasing threateningly as an avalanche, and which will sooner or later precipitate itself in wild destruction upon us all. Who can blame them? Might is stronger than right! And so the revolution is declared <i xml:lang="fr">en permanence</i>, and war between every man and his neighbour. For the present he has conquered⁠—he thinks he has conquered⁠—and glories in his victory and in the imperial crown which he has won for his master, and which he has taken from the shelf, where another laid it who would not take it from the hands of the people!⁠—from the hands of the people of those days⁠—a good, true, faithful people, whose most sacred dream was this crown! Ask them if they still believe! Ask them what they think of the crown by the grace of God! Ask them what they dream of now!”</p>
			<p>Uncle Ernst pointed to the dismissed workmen, who were crossing the court, in larger and smaller parties, towards the lower building, from the door of which Cilli’s father had issued before, and were gesticulating wildly and talking together.</p>
			<p>“Will they be paid off without any disturbance?” asked Reinhold.</p>
			<p>“The police-station is too near,” answered Uncle Ernst, with a bitter smile. “They are still afraid of the police; you need be under no anxiety. And, before I forget it, thank you, my boy.”</p>
			<p>“What for, uncle?”</p>
			<p>“There was no necessity for it, but I saw that you were ready to stand up for me at need.”</p>
			<p>“Had you doubted it?”</p>
			<p>“No, in spite of your enthusiasm for Bismarck. And now go to Ferdinanda. You are going to the Exhibition?”</p>
			<p>“I heard something of it; but, to tell you the truth, I have lost all inclination for it.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, nonsense!” said Uncle Ernst. “Ferdinanda would be inconsolable, and⁠—I do not like to have my business arrangements interfering with the family affairs.”</p>
			<p>Uncle Ernst pressed Reinhold’s hand heartily, and walked into the house, passing through the workmen, who drew back timidly on either side. Reinhold left the place with a hesitating step. He would have liked to remain with his uncle, at any rate; and he was more than doubtful that Ferdinanda would be inconsolable if he did not come.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
