<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>II</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-2" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</h3>
			<p>Reinhold had vainly attempted the day before to persuade his uncle to agree, for this once at least, to the increase of pay demanded by the work-people; he would so evidently be the greater sufferer if he were prevented, by the threatened strike of the work-people, from completing his contracts within the stipulated time. Uncle Ernst was not to be moved. The work-people, on the other hand, who were quite alive to their favourable position and perhaps overrated it, had adhered no less obstinately to their demands, so that after hours of discussion backwards and forwards, during which everybody got more and more excited, matters had come to extremities, and Reinhold, who had expected this result and had silently prepared for it, had been obliged, pistol in hand, to drive the furious and drunken mob back from his uncle’s threshold. At the same moment the police had appeared, had with some difficulty seized the ringleaders and put down the riot. But the agitation had spread like lightning through the other marble-works; everywhere there had been more or less disturbance; the men in the brick and stone yards joined the rising; since this morning all these works were at a standstill, and the yards were empty. The masters had speedily arranged a meeting, which was to take place in an hour. Uncle Ernst was just ready to start, Reinhold was with him in his room, attempting once more to persuade the obstinate man to greater mildness, or at least to take a calmer view of the state of affairs.</p>
			<p>“It seems to me, uncle,” he said, “that this is just like a mutiny at sea. If a man is not strong enough to overpower the scoundrels and does not care to lose his ship and its cargo, to say nothing of his own life, he must try to come to terms with them. It is not easy for a proud man, as I know from experience, but in the end it is the wisest course. The men know that the masters have undertaken large contracts, that you will lose thousands upon thousands if you stop the works and are thereby prevented from fulfilling your engagements; they know all that, and they know also that you must give in at last. I should have done so yesterday in your place, before matters had gone so far that you were forced to uphold your authority by force on your own ground. Today matters have changed; today the question is not of one solitary case, but of a general calamity, which must be decided upon general principles. And if you do not agree with this view of affairs, well, give way for once; let yourself be ruled if it must be so; do not throw the weight of your name and credit into the balance of the disputants.”</p>
			<p>Uncle Ernst laughed bitterly.</p>
			<p>“The weight of my name, of my credit! My dear Reinhold, you forget who you are talking to! Am I Bismarck? Am I the Chancellor and President of the Council? Do all sit in breathless silence when I rise to speak? Do all tremble when I frown? Do all shrink when I raise my voice? Do all give way when I threaten to desert them? Is there an army at my back if I stamp my foot? Bah! my name is Schmidt, and there is an end of it.”</p>
			<p>“No, no, uncle!” exclaimed Reinhold, “there is not an end of it; you have only shown that we must do in small matters what he does in great ones. Even the great Bismarck knows how to trim his sails and tack when it is necessary, and does it very skilfully so far as I can understand. We must take example even from our enemies. It sounds hard, I know, and is a bitter pill; but when you come home, as you probably will do, angry and wrathful, we will sit down to dinner, and I will help you manfully to wash down your anger and wrath in an extra bottle or two.”</p>
			<p>Uncle Ernst did not answer at once; he walked up and down the room with his head down, sunk in deep thought, his hands behind his back, occasionally stroking his grey beard, or passing a hand through his bushy hair. At length he shook his head several times, stood still and said:</p>
			<p>“I cannot do it; I cannot give in without giving myself up, without ceasing to be what I am. But why not? I no longer suit this world any more than it suits me. Neither of us loses anything in the other⁠—on the contrary, he who succeeds to my place will know better what should be done or left undone, in order to live in peace with the world. Will you be that other, Reinhold?”</p>
			<p>“I?” exclaimed Reinhold, astonished,</p>
			<p>“You! You are a true Schmidt, and have been so shaken and tossed about by the waves, that it must be a hard blow that you cannot stand up against. You learnt something in your youth, and since then have been out in the world, and you probably see things from a clearer point of view than we who have always remained at home and have by degrees lost our clearsightedness. You are tied to no past, to no scheme of life by which you must stand or fall, but may, on the contrary, start on an entirely fresh one, according to your own judgment and the light in which matters appear to you; and then the reason why I would choose you before all others for my successor is⁠—”</p>
			<p>Uncle Ernst broke off, like a man who has still got the most difficult thing to say, and can only gather strength for it by a deep breath.</p>
			<p>“Is that you are dear to me, Reinhold, and⁠—and⁠—I believe that you have a little love for me, and that is more than I can say of anyone else in the world.”</p>
			<p>He had walked to the window and stood there. Reinhold followed him and laid his hand on his shoulder.</p>
			<p>“Dear uncle⁠—”</p>
			<p>Uncle Ernst did not move.</p>
			<p>“Dear uncle! I thank you from my heart for your love, which you give me so freely, for how could I have deserved it? What I did yesterday I would have done for any captain under whom I had served for four and twenty hours. If indeed love deserves love, then I deserve yours, for I love and honour you as I would love and honour a father. But that I am the only one who loves you, you only say because you are out of spirits, and I hope you do not think it; and if you do think it, I know better than you.”</p>
			<p>“Indeed!” said Uncle Ernst. “You know better? You know nothing about the matter. Have you ever waited in helpless anguish and despair, tearing your hair because nature seemed to do her work too slowly? Have you ever sunk on your knees in gratitude when your child’s first cry smote on your ear? Have you ever nursed children on your knees, and secretly found all your happiness in their laughing eyes, and then seen how those eyes ceased to laugh at you, how they looked shyly past you and turned away, eyes and hearts both? To know such things a man must have experienced them.”</p>
			<p>“At the worst you can only be speaking of Philip,” said Reinhold, “and even there you take too gloomy a view; but Ferdinanda! And even if all is not as it should be, is it not partly your own fault, my dear uncle? A girl’s heart needs sunshine, constant sunshine! During these last few days I have never once heard you speak so kindly to her as you have just done to me.”</p>
			<p>“Because you understand me,” exclaimed Uncle Ernst. “Ferdinanda does not understand me. I do not expect that she or any other woman should. They are not sent into the world for that; they are here to cook and to knit, like Rike, or if they cannot all cook and knit, to spend their time in playing the piano, playing at sculpture, and so on. I consider it one of the principal causes of the feebleness and worthlessness of the present day that women are allowed so much liberty, and can interfere in so many things that are quite beyond their province. Besides, if you think so much of the girl⁠—and I allow she is worth rather more than most of the chatterboxes⁠—marry her! You would then at once have a right to take the business off my hands.”</p>
			<p>Was this one of his uncle’s grim jokes, or was it earnest? Reinhold could not tell. Happily he was spared the necessity of answering by a knock at the door.</p>
			<p>It was Cilli’s father, old Kreisel, who at Herr Schmidt’s “Come in!” stepped into the room.</p>
			<p>“What is it, Kreisel?” asked Uncle Ernst “But, my good man, what an extraordinary get up! Are you going to a funeral?”</p>
			<p>The old man’s attire seemed to justify Uncle Ernst’s question. His little bald head only just appeared above the stiff collar of his old-fashioned, long-tailed coat, while his boots, on the contrary, at the end of the short shabby black trousers, had full liberty. He carried in his hands a tall chimney-pot hat, with a very narrow brim, of the most antiquated fashion, and a pair of gloves whose past lustre had faded with time as the colour had faded out of his shrunken face, the careworn, wasted look of which was only too well suited to his attire.</p>
			<p>“In truth I am going to a funeral,” he answered with his low, tremulous voice.</p>
			<p>“Well then, be off!” said Uncle Ernst.</p>
			<p>“Whose is it?”</p>
			<p>“My own.”</p>
			<p>Uncle Ernst stared. “Are you mad, old friend?”</p>
			<p>“I think not,” answered Kreisel; “but I will speak to you at a more convenient time.”</p>
			<p>“To your own funeral?” repeated Uncle Ernst. “I am not in the humour for jokes. Wait a bit, Reinhold! And now out with it, Kreisel! What is the matter? What do you want?”</p>
			<p>“My discharge!” said the old man, taking a white handkerchief from his coat pocket, and wiping his bald head, on which great drops of perspiration were standing. “And I may well call that my funeral.”</p>
			<p>“Well, go and be buried then!” thundered Uncle Ernst.</p>
			<p>The old man shrank together, as if he had really received his deathblow. Reinhold stood embarrassed and troubled. Uncle Ernst paced the room with hasty steps, then stopped and turned sharply towards the little man and growled down upon him from his superior height:</p>
			<p>“And this is the way you treat me! Fourteen years have we worked together in joy and in sorrow; you have never heard a hasty word from my lips that I have not afterwards asked your pardon for, because you with your weak nerves cannot stand anything of the kind, and I would as soon do anything to hurt you as to your poor Cilli. And if I have not done enough for you, it is not my fault⁠—I have of my own accord doubled your salary, and would have tripled it if you had asked me: but you never said a word, and I have always had to press it on you; and now, when⁠—the devil may understand it! I cannot!”</p>
			<p>“And you are not likely to understand, Herr Schmidt, if you will not allow me to tell you my reasons,” answered the clerk, turning his hat round and round despairingly.</p>
			<p>“Well then, tell me in⁠—in my nephew’s presence; I have no secrets from him.”</p>
			<p>“It is not exactly a business secret,” said the clerk; “it is my secret, which has long been burning into my soul, and it will be comparatively easy to tell it in the presence of the Captain, who has always been so kind to me and my daughter. I must leave you, Herr Schmidt, before you send me away, as you sent away those thirty men on Thursday; I also⁠—”</p>
			<p>He held his hat steady now, and his voice no longer trembled; and he fixed his small, twinkling eyes firmly on Uncle Ernst.</p>
			<p>“I also am a Socialist!”</p>
			<p>The determination was doubtless an heroic one for the old man, and the situation in which he found himself was tragical; and yet Reinhold almost laughed out loud, when Uncle Ernst, instead of storming and thundering, as was his wont, only opened his eyes wide and said in an unusually quiet, almost gentle voice: “Are you not also a Communist?”</p>
			<p>“I consider Communism to be, under certain circumstances, allowable,” answered the old gentleman, dropping his eyes again, and in a scarcely audible voice.</p>
			<p>“Then go home,” said Uncle Ernst, “and take an hour’s sleep to calm your excitement, and when you awake again, think that it is all a dream; and now not a word more, or I shall be really angry.”</p>
			<p>The old man did not venture to answer; he bowed himself out of the door, with a glance at Reinhold that seemed to say: “You are witness: I have done my duty.”</p>
			<p>Reinhold seized his uncle’s hand. “Thank you!”</p>
			<p>“What for? for not taking the poor old fool at his word? Pooh! he understands as much about such matters as a newborn baby, and has picked it all up out of his books, over which he spends half the night because he cannot sleep, and his Cilli, good little thing, keeps him company. That sort of Socialism will not do much harm.⁠—Well!”</p>
			<p>Grollmann, the old servant, had entered with an embarrassed look and a visiting card, which he passed from one hand to the other as if it were a bit of red-hot iron. And Uncle Ernst, as soon as he had glanced at the card, threw it on to the table as if it had burnt him. “Are you mad?”</p>
			<p>“The young gentleman was so urgent,” said Grollmann.</p>
			<p>“I am not at home to him⁠—once for all.”</p>
			<p>“It would only be for a few minutes; the Captain had spoken about him already.”</p>
			<p>“What does this mean, Reinhold?”</p>
			<p>Reinhold had read the name on the card: “Philip did beg me,” he answered, “the first time I met him, and yesterday again when I called upon him⁠—”</p>
			<p>“You called upon him?”</p>
			<p>“I thought it my duty⁠—and he begged me to ask your consent to an interview; I⁠—”</p>
			<p>He did not like to continue before the servant, well as the old factotum must know all the family affairs; Uncle Ernst also seemed embarrassed:</p>
			<p>“I must go to the meeting,” he said.</p>
			<p>“You have still a quarter of an hour, uncle,” said Reinhold.</p>
			<p>“It will only be for a few minutes,” repeated Grollmann.</p>
			<p>Uncle Ernst turned an angry glance from one to the other, as if he wished to make them responsible beforehand for the consequences. “He may come in!”</p>
			<p>“Do you wish me to stay, uncle?”</p>
			<p>“You had better leave us alone.”</p>
			<p>Reinhold was not of the same opinion; he knew too well Uncle Ernst’s expression not to feel sure that a storm was brewing. But his wish must be obeyed.</p>
			<p>He met Philip in the doorway. Philip was quite distressed to disturb Reinhold; doubtless he and his father had important business together; he could come another time.</p>
			<p>“I do not know that I shall be at home to you another time,” growled Uncle Ernst.</p>
			<p>Reinhold pretended not to hear these unkind words, and excusing himself, hurried away.</p>
			<p>The door had closed behind him; father and son were face to face.</p>
			<p>“What do you want of me here!” asked Uncle Ernst, as if he were speaking to a third person crouching on the floor a few paces to the right of Philip.</p>
			<p>“I come on business,” answered Philip, as if the person he addressed were floating in the air a few feet to the right of his father.</p>
			<p>“I decline to transact any business with you.”</p>
			<p>“But perhaps not with the directors of the Berlin and Sundin Railway Company?”</p>
			<p>“I decline all business with the Berlin and Sundin Railway Company.”</p>
			<p>“You are standing in your own light. The business would be highly advantageous to you. We have got in our pockets a concession for the island railroad which is the continuation of our own railroad. Our station must be added to. When I had the pleasure of working with you, we bought together the land on which the station stands⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Upon your share,” allow me to remark.</p>
			<p>“Upon my share because you would not part with yours⁠—”</p>
			<p>“I had advanced you the money for the purchase of yours; so far as I know you had none then.”</p>
			<p>“I am the more indebted to you; you laid thereby the foundation of my present prosperity; for, recognising and profiting by the opportunity, I sold a portion to the company⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Which you had no right to sell.”</p>
			<p>“I had already repaid you your money, to the last farthing, with the proper interest.”</p>
			<p>“And had only forgotten the small circumstance that I gave you the money for the sole purpose of erecting⁠—in partnership with me⁠—cheap dwellings for workmen on that ground. It is true there was no written agreement.”</p>
			<p>“Fortunately for me, and I should say for you too! After what happened yesterday, you have probably lost all desire to improve the condition of these heroes of strikes and riots, as you have hitherto done to your own cost. But you can now repay yourself what you have spent. Your colony of work-people has, one way or another, never thriven, and is now at its last gasp. Put an end to it once for all. Quarter-day is at hand; we do not want the land before the new year; some of the houses will be empty now, particularly if you put some pressure on the people, and we will pay as if your cottages were so many four-storied houses.”</p>
			<p>“Where will you get the money from, if I may venture to ask?”</p>
			<p>“Where from? Where we have always got it.”</p>
			<p>“Where you have always got it?” returned Uncle Ernst. He turned for the first time a stern, fixed look upon his son. “That is to say, out of the pockets of the public, whose credulity you have, in the most shameless manner, deceived and betrayed with false and lying prospectuses; whose anxious hopes you feed with sham dividends, which they must pay themselves; whose loud complaints you boldly stifle in your so-called general meetings, till at length it occurs to the legal authorities that might is not always right. I do not care to have anything to do with the legal authorities⁠—and my carriage is at the door.”</p>
			<p>“So is mine,” said Philip, turning on his heel and leaving the room.</p>
			<p>Uncle Ernst went to a side-table and poured out a large glass of wine⁠—the bottle knocked against the glass; he had some difficulty in pouring out the wine⁠—and drank it down at one gulp.</p>
			<p>He stood there with an angry cloud on his brow, one hand leaning on the table, in a kind of stupor.</p>
			<p>“I did not wish it,” he murmured; “I wished to keep calm. When he came in he reminded me of his mother⁠—a vacant face too; she never understood me; but he is only a caricature of her⁠—the vacancy supplemented by vice! And then his voice⁠—her voice also⁠—her thin voice when she inflicted upon me her commonplace wisdom⁠—only it is enlivened by insolence⁠—wretched, insolent boy!”</p>
			<p>He drank down a second glass. The cloud on his brow had only grown darker.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
