<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>V</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-5" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">V</h3>
			<p>The storm was raging that night through the straight streets of Berlin also.</p>
			<p>Let it! What does one more discomfort signify to us, as we hurry along the pavement? We are accustomed to discomforts of every sort; and if a tile or a slate falls down occasionally at our feet, we have not been struck yet, thank goodness! And if a chimney should be blown down, or a new house fall in, or anything of that sort, we shall read about it in the papers tomorrow. We have weightier matters to consider, truly! The storm which raged through the Chambers today during the debates, will also unroof many a fine edifice on the Stock Exchange in quite another fashion, and many a great house which appeared this morning to stand firm enough, and command the market, will be shattered to its foundations, and will drag others down with it to disgraceful failure. Like this one here for instance; it is just finished after years of labour, having cost untold sums, and its magnificence having roused the astonishment of everybody who was favoured with a view of it, and the eager curiosity of the many who were obliged to content themselves with a sight of the lofty scaffolding. Was it not to be opened tonight with a great ball, of which for the last fortnight such wonders have been related? To be sure! And it is really a curious coincidence that it should take place just today, when the lightning has struck the neighbouring houses, that stand upon the same insecure foundations, have been erected from the same disgraceful materials, and are in every respect the same miserable swindle from basement to roof. I should not like to stand in that man’s shoes.</p>
			<p>Nor I either, my dear friend, but, believe me, our virtuous indignation, if he could be aware of it, would only be an additional satisfaction to this man. He has landed his goods in safety. What does it matter to him if you, or I, or anybody be drowned in the rushing stream from which there is no escape except for him and such as him? Who asked us to venture into the water? You thought, perhaps, that if he were not prevented from giving this feast by the black Care that sits behind him, he must be so by very shame, especially today when he and the whole brood of them have been branded with the mark of Cain upon their brows. And now look I look up at this splendid façade, see how the light from the innumerable wax candles streams through the great plate-glass windows, with their crimson silk hangings, and shines like daylight upon us out here in the dark! No contemptible gas except in the passages and corridors! That is how it is in the Emperor’s palace, and he must have the same. That splendid awning before the door, which is being blown about by the wind, the Brussels carpet which is laid in the dirt of the street from the door to the carriages, will be thrown into the dust-hole tomorrow in rags and tatters. Why not? That is what they are for. But come⁠—the police are already beginning to look indignantly at us. They suspect our wicked doubts about the sacred rights of order, which consist in plate-glass windows, marble doorways, fringed awnings, and Brussels carpets. Or have you got a card of invitation like Justus Anders there, who is lost in wonder over the varnished boots which so seldom deck his feet, and is in trouble about his new hat, with handsome Antonio following as his aide-de-camp, hastening in without noticing us his best friends; but do not look morosely at him, and hurl no anathemas at him out of the depths of your injured, democratic conscience. The poet is the equal of the king, and the artist must be the equal of the speculator. Those are laws which we must respect. And now let us go and drink a glass to Lasker’s health. Only this one more carriage? Oh! you rogue! because there are ladies’ dresses⁠—it serves you right! Old Kniebreche. <i xml:lang="fr">Sauve qui peut!</i></p>
			<p>The old Baroness was of course there. She was everywhere, it was said, where anything was to be seen. She had been present at the creation of the world, and would assist at its end. She had first intended to let Ottomar get her an invitation, but eventually entrusted the honour to Herr von Wallbach. The dissension between the Werbens and the Wallbachs was no longer a secret, at least from her. Dear Giraldi, who was, however, discretion itself, and really only repeated what could absolutely no longer be concealed, had told her something⁠—too terrible, but still not so terrible as what that good Wallbach, who had fetched her in his carriage, had related to her on the way.</p>
			<p>“Poor, poor Carla! Absolutely deserted on account of a pretty girl of no family, whom his former mistress had had to intercede with for him. Wallbach was going to show her at this very ball the principal performer in this pretty story, a dancer from an obscure theatre. Wallbach must be sure to remember! She was so curious to see this person. In such an utter scandal, it was impossible to be too careful about the most trifling details. And if dear Carla had tried to comfort herself in her grief⁠—of course, my dear Wallbach, what was she to do? It speaks for itself. And she had the dear Count there under her very hand! <em xml:lang="fr">Oh! Mon Dieu!</em> How I have been deceived in Ottomar, but they have, none of them, been good for anything. I knew his grandfather, and even saw his great grandfather when I was a little girl. But the old gentleman would turn in his grave if he knew what his great-grandchildren were doing. And Elsa⁠—my dear Wallbach, I suppose I must believe that story, but it is a strong measure for a General’s daughter. As to Ottomar drawing lots of bills of exchange⁠—I know whole regiments who do it; but there I stop⁠—further than that I cannot go, unless I heard it from his own lips.”</p>
			<p>“But, my dear lady, I conjure you by all that is sacred, be discreet.”</p>
			<p>“Do you take me for a baby⁠—for a goose, for I don’t know what? You have no business to talk like that to old Kniebreche, who might be your grandmother. Give me your arm, and point out a few interesting people. Will Lasker be here, too? What do you say? One ought not to talk of the hangman.⁠— What is it to me if tag and rag fall out together? But our worthy host⁠—do point him out to me⁠—the big, broad-shouldered man with the fine forehead and full chin? A fine-looking man. Bring him to me at once!”</p>
			<p>Philip was charmed, at last and in his own house, to become personally acquainted with a lady who was reckoned amongst the few celebrities in which Berlin rejoices. Now, for the first time, he could venture to say that his entertainment had not proved a failure. Would her ladyship allow him the honour of conducting her to the ballroom? Unfortunately he had not been able to restrain any longer the young people’s desire to begin dancing, or he would certainly have asked her ladyship to have led the polonaise with him. He flattered himself that she would not feel herself too isolated at his house, though several illustrious names would not appear in the list of those present; as, for instance, that of Count Golm. One could not have everything and everybody at once. He was, and always had been, a modest man; and that “a king’s glory was his state, and our glory was the labour of our hands,” was a saying which he had, all his life, held to, and hoped to continue to do so. Were the pillars which supported the orchestra real marble? Certainly. He was the son of a worker in marble. He might say that everything her ladyship saw here was real, save, perhaps, a little of the colour on the ladies’ cheeks, about which, for his part, he had secret doubts; and the nobility of a few barons and baronesses, which might also seem a little doubtful to her ladyship. The Stock Exchange seemed nowadays to be all-powerful, but after all, however long the train might be, and whatever quantity of diamonds were worn in the hair, or sewn on the dress, what a difference there was between Baroness Kniebreche and Baroness⁠—He would name no names, but a difference there must always be. Would her ladyship permit him to offer her some refreshments? they were here close by.</p>
			<p>“Quite a presentable man for a parvenu,” whispered Baroness Kniebreche into the ear of Baroness von Holzweg, whom she met in the refreshment-room in the midst of a group of great ladies. “He understands the art of living, it must be allowed. There is not a more magnificent room in Berlin, even at his Majesty’s, only here it is much more comfortable. What a capital idea to put a refreshment-room so close to the ballroom, and such good things too. What have you got there, my dear! Oyster patties? Delicious! Young man, bring some oyster patties and a glass of Château Yquem. How well that sort of man understands bringing people together. Of course there are all the tag and rag here⁠—actors, dancers, heaven knows what! But if one does not look too closely one might imagine oneself at a court ball. The ballroom absolutely swarms with guardsmen. Well, young people, I cannot blame you; you are cocks of the walk here. Apropos, what brought you here, dear Baroness?”</p>
			<p>“Quite between ourselves, dear Baroness,” whispered Baroness Holzweg.</p>
			<p>“Of course between ourselves!” cried Baroness Kniebreche.</p>
			<p>“Prince Wladimir is expected to be here for a moment.”</p>
			<p>“ ‘You don’t say so! Of course you and your niece could not fail. But take care! The ‘illustrious lovers’ are getting quite common. Come, come, I meant no harm; I readily allow the greatest latitude in the upper circles, if only the proprieties are observed as regards the lower ranks. But such things are going on now, dear Baroness⁠—such things!”</p>
			<p>And Baroness Kniebreche began waving her gigantic fan with much energy.</p>
			<p>“May I venture to ask, dear Baroness?” whispered Baroness Holzweg, drawing nearer, in curiosity.</p>
			<p>“Well, quite between ourselves, you know, dear Baroness.”</p>
			<p>“How can you imagine, dear Baroness⁠—”</p>
			<p>The heads of the two old ladies disappeared for a long time behind the black fan.</p>
			<p>“And these are all facts, dear Baroness?”</p>
			<p>“Absolute facts. I have them from Wallbach, who is generally discretion itself⁠—but there are limits to everything. Is not that him there behind the door? Actually! and talking to Signor Giraldi. I must go there. That good man absolutely hears the grass grow.”</p>
			<p>The old lady got up with difficulty, and rustled off, with her glass to her half-blind eyes, towards the two gentlemen, everyone retreating, scared, before the black fan.</p>
			<p>Baroness Holzweg remained sitting, with an evil smile upon her pale, puffy face.</p>
			<p>“Ah!” she murmured, “how pleased Agnes will be. The haughty Herr von Werben, who will not dance with her, because he can understand either secret or open engagements, but not those that cannot be made public! And his arrogant sister, whom he has forbidden to have anything to do with Agnes, and who has now taken up with a merchant-captain. Charming!”</p>
			<p>“What is amusing you so, my dear?” asked Frau von Pusterhausen, coming back again to her friend. “You were talking such secrets with Baroness Kniebreche, and I could not get away from Madame Veitel, or whatever she calls herself. She chatters and chatters⁠—I only heard a few words⁠—you seemed to be talking about the Werbens? Am I right? And can you tell me what it was about?”</p>
			<p>“But it remains between ourselves, my dear?”</p>
			<p>“You may be quite easy, my dear.”</p>
			<p>And the two ladies put their heads together, one maliciously listening, the other spitefully retailing what she had herself just heard.</p>
			<p>Giraldi, after he had wandered through the rooms for half an hour, met Herr von Wallbach, who had luckily got away from the Baroness.</p>
			<p>“I was just going,” he said; “the heat, the noise, the everlasting talk about Lasker⁠—”</p>
			<p>Herr von Wallbach passed his hand over his bald forehead with a gentle sigh. “To be sure,” he said, “Lasker! it is a terrible blow. Such a splendid business. We shall never recover the blow, although he has not directly attacked us. It is the beginning of the end, believe me.”</p>
			<p>“I do not think it looks so bad,” said Giraldi. “It is only the first shock; our Ministers have certainly behaved miserably, the mob will triumph, but the reaction cannot be long in coming. They will find that the sun of radicalism, which shines so brightly just now, is itself not without a flaw. The Government, if only to anger the opposition, will guarantee the interest for a sufficient loan for a time, and probably afterwards take over the whole business. The promoters must have acted worse than stupidly if a good slice does not fall to their share, amongst others to our friend the Count.”</p>
			<p>“Nevertheless we⁠—I mean the Warnow trustees⁠—may have to wait a long time for the payment of the second instalment,” said Herr von Wallbach thoughtfully.</p>
			<p>“I am certain of that,” answered Giraldi. “You may thank your forbearance, which has lasted until the shares with which you paid him have gone down so far. If I had only been listened to, he must have paid the whole million at once, when the shares stood at seventy-five; it would have been possible, and he would still have retained nearly half a million.”</p>
			<p>“Yes, true,” said Herr von Wallbach, “it has again been proved that you are the best financier amongst us. It is lucky that we got the first instalment. The money, if all happens as you say, is as good as the Baroness’s property already; but, nevertheless, we must one of these days⁠—I wanted to remind you of that⁠—meet once more, as a matter of form, to receive your report. You have still got the money at Haselow’s?”</p>
			<p>“Where else?”</p>
			<p>“I only mention it because we left the investment absolutely to you. I wish to heaven the time had already come when I was quit of the whole thing. At any rate I shall make Schieler represent me at the trustees’ meeting. When a man is on the point of breaking with the son, he cannot very well be on friendly terms with the father.”</p>
			<p>“Pay Ottomar’s bills tomorrow; close one eye to certain mistakes in the signatures which must be amongst them⁠—how should he have managed otherwise?⁠—shut the other to the fair Ferdinanda, and everything remains as it was.”</p>
			<p>“Do not joke about it. At the best there will be a fearful scandal.”</p>
			<p>“Better too early than too late. And besides, if the public hear of the new engagement at the same time that they hear of the breaking off of the other, all will be well again.”</p>
			<p>Herr von Wallbach looked very thoughtful.</p>
			<p>“Since this morning, since that terrible speech,” he said, “the Count’s position has become much worse. I don’t know what will become of him now.”</p>
			<p>“Pardon me,” answered Giraldi; “to my mind the affair looks quite different. The respite is an immense gain for the Count. There are so many chances. The shares may go up again, or the powerful hand which enabled him to pay the first instalment may be held out to him again. If it is not, why, the trustees must agree to a compromise⁠—say twenty-five percent off; that is to say, the Count can pay up seventy-five. And after all he has always got the entailed estates.”</p>
			<p>“True, true,” said Herr von Wallbach; “that would always remain to him.”</p>
			<p>He passed his hand over his forehead.</p>
			<p>“Have you seen Werben yet?”</p>
			<p>“He will hardly come. He is more agreeably employed. Bertalda has again lent her house to the loving couple, and is dancing away the sorrows of her young widowhood. The polka is over. I will beg for a few more details from the communicative little thing, in case they may be of use to you. I shall see you perhaps tomorrow. For today, <i xml:lang="it">Addio</i>.”</p>
			<p>Giraldi turned away at the very moment that Baroness Kniebreche came up, and slipped into the ballroom, making as he passed a sign to Bertalda, whom he met on the arm of a very smart officer. Bertalda dismissed her partner, and soon overtook Giraldi, who had passed into one of the less-crowded side-rooms.</p>
			<p>“Well!” he asked, sitting down, and inviting Bertalda by a gesture to take a place by him, “did you get the money, child!”</p>
			<p>“Yes, and I am extremely obliged to you. I was really in great need of it. My poor brother⁠—”</p>
			<p>“I do not want to know what you did with the money. So long as you oblige me, that is sufficient. The important point is, are they happy at last?”</p>
			<p>The girl coloured. “I really did my best,” she said hesitatingly.</p>
			<p>“She never came?” asked Giraldi vehemently.</p>
			<p>“Oh yes! I had told her so much about her brother’s ball, and⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Your dress⁠—and so forth.”</p>
			<p>“Yes, that also. But it was not needed. I saw in her eyes that she could not hold out any longer, and was delighted that I had given her such a suitable opportunity. She came, too, half an hour before the time, and found everything very charming, just as it was the first time she was there, in November, and helped me to dress, and⁠—well, one knows what it is when a girl, who is really in love, is waiting for her lover. A ring was heard. ‘Who can that be?’ said I. ‘Perhaps it is Herr von Werben,’ said Johanna, who naturally knows all about it. ‘What brings him here today? Perhaps a bouquet; he is always so attentive,’ said Johanna. She turned white and red in one moment, and trembled from head to foot, then fell upon my neck and sobbed, ‘No, no, I have sworn it;’ and before I could turn round myself, she was out of the room, without hat or cloak, down the stairs, and into the carriage, which was waiting at the door⁠—br-r-r!⁠—and she was gone. Next time she will not run away, I am certain of that.”</p>
			<p>“Next time,” cried Giraldi, with scarcely restrained fury, “as if I could wait a hundred years. I had so set my hopes on it. Made so much of it to him. How did he take it?”</p>
			<p>“He was frantic. I had to spend half an hour in consoling him. There never was anything like it. I really think he will do himself a mischief, if he doesn’t get the girl. It is no joke, I can tell you, to deal with them both. If I were not so fond of Werben, and so sorry for poor Ferdinanda, I would not do it for all the money in the world.”</p>
			<p>“Did not he want to come here with you?”</p>
			<p>“He is lying full length on my sofa and would listen to nothing. But I think he will come still. An hour or so of that sort of thing gets tiresome, here it is delightful. There is the quadrille beginning, and here comes my partner; may I⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Yes, go; and if you see him, tell him that I expect him tomorrow morning between nine and ten. He will know why.”</p>
			<p>“I have been looking for you everywhere, Fräulein Bertalda.”</p>
			<p>The black-haired young dandy carried off his charming, tastefully-dressed partner, who smilingly took his arm, blowing a kiss to Giraldi over her shoulder as she went.</p>
			<p>Giraldi remained seated. While the stream of gaiety rolled uninterruptedly around him, he could snatch a few minutes to think over his position. It was by no means so prosperous as it had been a few days ago. Since midday he had had to give up all hope of the second instalment upon which he had counted at least in part. He had moreover reckoned with absolute certainty, that today the net which he had woven with such untiring perseverance would entangle Ottomar and Ferdinanda. He would have made better use of the interesting facts than Antonio had done about the rendezvous in the park. Ottomar’s and Carla’s engagement had been the consequence of that⁠—this would have been the cause of the breaking off of that same engagement. Who could now blame Ottomar if, irritated by the girl’s absurd prudery, frantic and despairing, he returned to Carla⁠—to Carla, who loved him as much as she was capable of loving anyone, and, frivolous as she was, would, for the mere sake of change, turn back from the new love to the old? And had not his conversation with Herr von Wallbach just now shown him that there were at any rate waverings in that quarter as to whether matters should be allowed to come to extremities? Herr von Wallbach had from the first declared that he did unfortunately share Giraldi’s “suspicion” that there had been some ugly circumstances connected with Ottomar’s continual drawing of bills of exchange, but that he would never directly interfere upon that point himself. If this suspicion should be justified⁠—possibly at the next final settlement of the trustee business⁠—he should of course be obliged to take notice of it; all the more in proportion to the extent to which the report might already have spread, but still he should only do so to express his sorrow and his conviction that such ugly rumours must disappear as absolutely as they had arisen mysteriously. On the other hand, if any positive proof appeared of the relations that Giraldi maintained still existed between Ottomar and Ferdinanda, he⁠—Wallbach⁠—was quite determined to make the proper use of it on his sister’s account, to whom such a rivalry must, in the long run, be disagreeable. But this positive proof was still not procurable. There remained the affair of the bills of exchange! And if Ottomar came to grief tomorrow? and his proud father took the burden upon himself to avert the fearful disgrace which would recoil upon the whole family? He indeed knew the truth; but could he in that case speak? Would he not have to look on silently, while the father and son settled the matter amicably between them? Twenty thousand thalers indeed would not be so easily procured; but in such a case impossibilities might be overcome, and the General would be sure to have good and powerful friends. At the worst, if Baroness Kniebreche and the others who had been let into the secret should have too completely broken the sacred seal of confidence, there might be two or three duels, which would just suit Ottomar, who had laughingly asserted the other day that he should soon have made up his dozen!</p>
			<p>A duel between him and Herr von Wallbach indeed! That would be decisive.</p>
			<p>Only Herr von Wallbach, whose nerves were always a little unsteady, was thinking of anything but a duel. How to provoke Ottomar against him?</p>
			<p>There would be difficulty about that. It would be necessary to speak more plainly, to mix himself up more directly in the business than before, and it had been his well-weighed decision not to let the mask fall, until⁠—⁠</p>
			<p>The Italian’s face grew still darker as he sat there brooding and meditating, his head lightly resting on his gloved right hand, his crush-hat on his knees, while from time to time joyous couples hastened past him to the ballroom, where they were still being summoned to the quadrille, which was more difficult to arrange now on account of the number of dancers.</p>
			<p>If Valerie tomorrow, as he still hoped, agreed to everything, as she had always hitherto done, the mine could then, before it was fired, be so deeply laid that not one stone upon another should remain of the edifice of the Werbens’ prosperity; the very bones even of the hated race should be scattered here and there through the air.</p>
			<p>But if she opposed him? If, after seven and twenty years of dumb submission, she should rebel? and not now, and for once only, but forever, should refuse him obedience? If she should appear as the mistress and superior? Well, she would do so at her peril! He was prepared for it too. The time for temporising, waiting, diplomatising, would be over at once; there would only be a very plain, very clearly-expressed question: Yes, or no? But she would never have the courage. And she was welcome to hate him, if only she feared and obeyed him.</p>
			<p>A slight noise near him made him look up, and he started as he met the fiery black eyes of his young countryman.</p>
			<p>“Eccolo!” cried Giraldi, stretching out his hand with his most bewitching smile; “how did you get here, my boy!”</p>
			<p>“There was a lack of dancing-men,” answered Antonio, pressing the offered hand to his heart; “the maestro was desired to bring a few young artists with him, and was good enough to think of me.”</p>
			<p>“And why are you not dancing?”</p>
			<p>“I have not the happiness of being acquainted with so many beautiful young ladies as Eccellenza.”</p>
			<p>Giraldi smiled, whilst he turned over in his own mind whether Antonio could have recognised in Bertalda the veiled lady who came to see Ferdinanda. It was extremely improbable, but he must give some explanation of his intimate conversation with the pretty girl.</p>
			<p>“Do you envy me my happiness, Antonio?” he asked.</p>
			<p>“I do not grudge Eccellenza his happiness. Who can deserve it better?” answered Antonio, with fawning humility.</p>
			<p>“And since you are modest, you will be happier than all the gold in the world can make me. You are young and handsome, and⁠—you love; and that your love may be crowned with success, you have but to leave it to me and Brother Ambrosio. We are both busy on your behalf. Have a little patience only, and your probation will be ended, and you will have everything your heart can wish for⁠—yes, more than you have dreamed of in your wildest dreams; but, above all, revenge⁠—the most brilliant, triumphant, heart-stirring revenge⁠—upon your enemy! I swear it to you by the Sacred Heart and the Holy Virgin!” The two Italians crossed themselves. “And now, my boy, I will talk to you in a few days. For today forget the cares of love, and pluck the rose of pleasure, without wounding yourself with the thorns.”</p>
			<p>He pointed towards the ballroom, again pressed Antonio’s hand, and went.</p>
			<p>The young man looked after him with a gloomy brow, as he slowly walked away. He had never for a moment doubted that the charming young girl whom he had seen talking so earnestly and familiarly to the signor, was the same whom he had met that evening in the dusk⁠—that is to say, the same who had at one time repeatedly visited Ferdinanda; he knew her height and figure so well. She might be his mistress⁠—well, but then what had she to do with Ferdinanda? Why had he not told him the real state of the case? Why did he not tell him the lady’s name today? Why had he passed as quickly as possible to another subject⁠—or rather had only repeated the same fine speeches with which he had so often flattered his confiding companion, although to this day not one of his promises had come true? And were these to suffice him? Was he to prolong his miserable life for this⁠—he whom the clever signor had long ceased to trust? The signor had better beware of a person named Antonio Michele, who, when the signor had sworn by the Sacred Heart and the Holy Virgin, had also taken an oath which stood in the closest connection with that of the signor. There was the signor’s lady. He would not approach her directly⁠—Antonio Michele was not such a fool⁠—but he would try and find out her name, which could not be very difficult; and, above all, he would not lose sight of her.</p>
			<p>Meanwhile Giraldi had wandered farther through the overcrowded rooms, looking round him from time to time to see if he could discover Ottomar, uncertain whether he wished to do so, or whether he should wait for him, whether it would not be better to go away now and leave things to take their course. The train for Sundin started at one o’clock. It was now twelve; he had still half an hour. Half an hour! Half a minute would have been enough generally for him to decide the most weighty matters. But a man grew stupid from dealing with fools. And now that boy also must get in his way!</p>
			<p>The sudden and quite unexpected meeting with Antonio had troubled Giraldi greatly. He had not thought about the young man for a long time; he had almost forgotten him, as he did all those whom he did not require immediately, or might not require again, for the furtherance of his plans. He required Antonio no longer. For the net which he was weaving for Ottomar and Ferdinanda, Bertalda was a much more accommodating and convenient tool. About Reinhold and Elsa he had long known all that he wished to know; and over the ardour with which at first he had followed up the idea of making out the handsome young man to be the son who should restore the already shaken relations between him and Valerie, he had himself smiled since. If Brother Ambrosio, indeed, had entered willingly into the affair⁠—if by his hints to Valerie he had awakened her longing, if not hope, for the lost son! But the experiment had entirely failed; it had even rather had the contrary result, and had shown him more clearly than ever that her heart was more and more, perhaps was entirely, turned against him. And even if, perhaps under other circumstances, he returned to his plan, there was no use thinking any more of Antonio, against whom Valerie’s suspicions had once been roused. She would not now believe in the strongest proof, to say nothing of a more or less well-invented fiction. And it was for this, for this hollow mockery, that he had inspired that passionate spirit with brilliant hopes and ambitious dreams, which must soon prove themselves an empty nothing, in which the young man himself perhaps no longer believed. There was sometimes a wild glare in the black eyes that had suggested to him that the young man would sooner or later go mad⁠—perhaps was already so; and at the moment in which he swore to him that he should be revenged upon his mortal enemy, a smile had passed like a flash across his usually firm-set lips, which only admitted of one interpretation. If he ever learnt that the man who had promised to help him to gain the woman he loved had driven her into the arms of his rival, would it not be well while it was yet time to give the murderous weapon another direction⁠—the right direction⁠—to the heart of their mutual enemy? To say to Antonio, “I must confess to you, my son, that what you have above all things feared is true⁠—the woman you love is now in his arms. I could not prevent it. Kill me! Or, if you would avenge yourself and me, keep your dagger ready⁠—I know you always carry it with you. In a few minutes he will be here, still intoxicated with his happiness. Strike him! strike him down!”</p>
			<p>Giraldi had stood leaning against the doorpost, lost in his bloodthirsty fancies as in a dream, looking with fixed eyes upon the throng, without seeing anything. Suddenly he started. There in front of him, only separated by the width of the room, was Ottomar. He was talking to one or two other officers, and still had his back to him. He could still get away through the door against which he was leaning into the next room, and out of the house. That would be best. After all his arrangements were made, the manager might give up the stage to his puppets. What need was there of a dagger in this domestic drama? A few dishonoured bills, a good deal of gossip, truth cunningly mixed with falsehood and cleverly insinuated in society, and the wished-for result could not be long in coming, even if one or other of the wires failed in its effect. “To be too busy is some danger,” as Hamlet says over the body of Polonius.</p>
			<p>And Giraldi slipped back into the room from which he had come, and, passing through some side-rooms and down the brilliantly-lighted marble staircase, gained the vestibule and cloakroom.</p>
			<p>Some guests were still arriving⁠—a few ladies who to judge from their remarks, had been kept late in the ballet, and an elderly gentleman, who took off his fur coat whilst the servant was helping Giraldi on with his. The Italian hastily turned up his collar, but the other had already recognised him, and stopped him as he was going.</p>
			<p>“What, Signor Giraldi! Are you going already?”</p>
			<p>“I am tired to death. Councillor, and the heat and noise upstairs are amazing.”</p>
			<p>“I have already been three times today to your house in vain. I must talk to you at least for a moment. What do you think of it, my dear friend⁠—what do you think of it?”</p>
			<p>“Of what?”</p>
			<p>The Councillor almost let his crush-hat fall. “Of what? Good heavens! Is it possible to talk about anything today except this abominable speech?”</p>
			<p>“It appears not,” said Giraldi. “Every other man and every fourth lady is talking about it upstairs. Fortunately it does not concern me.”</p>
			<p>“Not directly,” said the Councillor eagerly, “but indirectly. How clever you have been again. The only man who would not hear of a postponement of the date of payment of the second half of the purchase-money. You were only too right. The Count is ruined. He will never pay the second half.”</p>
			<p>“One must reconcile oneself to the inevitable.”</p>
			<p>“Very philosophical! But indeed with your genius for finance, you will soon make up for it. I only heard today that you⁠—I presume on the part of the Baroness, but it is the same thing⁠—had lent the Count the half million with which he⁠—”</p>
			<p>Giraldi’s brows met together like a thundercloud.</p>
			<p>“Had the Count been talking⁠—against his word of honour?”</p>
			<p>“The Count! the Count!” cried the Councillor. “As if he troubled himself about anything. He throws his shares into the market, depreciates their value, and in short amuses himself. I regret, by every hair on my head, that we ever had anything to do with a fine gentleman! Lübbener⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Ah!” said Giraldi.</p>
			<p>“Of course, Lübbener,” continued the Councillor, “he no doubt only acted in the interests of the railway, when he paid you this afternoon the half million of the mortgage, after you had declared your fixed resolution in any other case to move for an immediate public sale. I cannot blame you either for wishing to get back at once money which seemed in such danger; but it is hard when friends and foes alike work for our ruin⁠—”</p>
			<p>“I do not consider Lübbener’s finances by any means exhausted.”</p>
			<p>“Because⁠—pardon me, my dear sir⁠—this supposition suits you; I can assure you I was with him a quarter of an hour after you had finished your business with him. He was furious. He said it had done for him, and for our whole enterprise. Lasker’s speech this morning⁠—shares went down twenty percent; half a million to pay this afternoon, for which he was not in the least prepared⁠—it was the beginning of the end⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Just what Herr von Wallbach said,” said Giraldi. “But pardon me, Councillor, it is rather warm here⁠—”</p>
			<p>“You will not come up again!”</p>
			<p>“On no account.”</p>
			<p>“Perhaps you are right,” said the Councillor. “I would go with you if it were not for Lübbener, who is sure to be up there⁠—”</p>
			<p>“I did not see him.”</p>
			<p>“You must have overlooked our little friend. I wanted to tell him something that I have just heard from the Minister who sent for me, and has only just set me free, and which I hope may be useful to him in tomorrow’s battle.”</p>
			<p>“Then I will take leave of you. I am really tired to death.”</p>
			<p>The Councillor had not yet let go the button of Giraldi’s coat. Through the comparative silence of these downstairs rooms sounded from above the wild strains of a furious waltz, and the dumb rush and sweep of the dancers, whose whirling steps made the magnificent building tremble as if with ague.</p>
			<p>“They are dancing over a volcano,” said the Councillor in a low voice. “Believe me, he cannot hold out; it is impossible. We have been obliged to pay him with shares, of course, like all the world. How he is to meet his engagements now that our shares have fallen to twenty⁠—heaven only knows. I calculate that the man will be ruined in three weeks at the latest, and we with him.”</p>
			<p>“I regret it extremely, but if the world were coming to an end in half an hour, I should go to bed now.”</p>
			<p>The Councillor let go the button almost terrified. Such a wicked look had shot out of Giraldi’s great black eyes, although he had spoken with the tired smile of a completely worn-out man.</p>
			<p>“One would think he might play an active part in the downfall of the world,” murmured the Councillor, as he brushed up his short, dry hair before the big looking-glass. “Strange what odd ideas come into my head when I am with that man! Such calmness at such a moment! He does business to the extent of half a million, of which no human soul is aware, loses another half million, and⁠—goes to bed! Mysterious man!”</p>
			<p>The Councillor put his brush in his pocket, pulled out once more his white tie, seized his crush-hat, and was on the point of leaving the cloakroom, when another guest stepped hastily in, and throwing his fur coat on the table, called to the servant, in a voice apparently trembling with haste, “Be good enough to keep them separate, I shall only be here a short time. Ah, Councillor!”</p>
			<p>“Good gracious, Lübbener, what is the matter with you?”</p>
			<p>Lübbener signed to him to be silent, and laid his finger on his lips at the same time, then drew the horrified Councillor into the farthest corner of the cloakroom, and said, as he stood on the tips of his toes, and stretched his short neck as far as possible out of his white tie, “Is he still upstairs?”</p>
			<p>“Giraldi?” asked the Councillor, whose mind was still full of the Italian’s image. “You must have met him at the door.”</p>
			<p>“He! Philip⁠—Schmidt?”</p>
			<p>Utterly absurd as the question seemed, the Councillor could not smile; his friend’s face, always grey, was now ashy-white; the little black eyes, which generally twinkled so merrily, were now fixed; each one of the short hairs, so thickly covering the low forehead, seemed to stand up of itself.</p>
			<p>“Do not stare at me so,” exclaimed Lübbener. “I am quite in my right senses; I only hope that other people see as clearly into their affairs as I do with mine. I was with Haselow just before closing-time, to see if he could not help me with a hundred thousand or so tomorrow, as I had had a somewhat heavy payment to make, for which I was not prepared. ‘It is just the same with me,’ said Haselow. ‘Signor Giraldi took away the last fifty thousand of the Warnow money an hour ago⁠—the whole half million in three days.’ ”</p>
			<p>“Extraordinary! most extraordinary!” said the Councillor; “as the agent of the Baroness, to whom the half belongs, we certainly allowed him to invest the whole, but still⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Beware! beware!” gasped the other. “There is something wrong⁠—very wrong. Yesterday Golm throws half a million into the market; I keep up the price notwithstanding to thirty; this morning that abominable speech of Lasker’s⁠—down they go to twenty; this afternoon I have to pay Giraldi every farthing of the Golm mortgage. I have struggled, I am struggling still desperately, but there are limits to everything.”</p>
			<p>“It is very hard,” said the Councillor, sighing. “Our splendid, splendid enterprise! The Minister, too, was quite in despair today; but⁠—shall we not go upstairs? We can go on with our conversation there. I have several things of importance to communicate to you.”</p>
			<p>“Hush!” said Lübbener.</p>
			<p>He stood listening intently, then walked quickly to the big window from which he could see out of the cloakroom into the vestibule, shook his head and came back to the Councillor, muttering unintelligibly between his pale lips.</p>
			<p>“What is the matter now?” said the Councillor anxiously.</p>
			<p>The banker’s little black eyes glanced towards the servants in the cloakroom. They could hear nothing, and were moreover occupied in arranging their numbers; then he made the Councillor a sign to stoop his tall figure to him.</p>
			<p>“I ought to have consulted you properly, but the danger that he”⁠—the banker pointed with his finger in the direction from which the noise of the ball came⁠—“was too great. Our four millions preference shares which would have to be issued now⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Good heavens!” said the Councillor.</p>
			<p>“It was a mere vague suspicion, but it left me no peace. He and I, you know, have the keys, and when after the office was shut, I told the clerk I had some business still to do⁠—true enough”⁠—the Councillor had bent his head so low that the banker was whispering into his ear. Then they looked fixedly into each other’s eyes. The Councillor’s long face had turned as grey as the other’s.</p>
			<p>“But this is a matter for the police,” he said.</p>
			<p>An evil smile crossed the banker’s compressed lips.</p>
			<p>“It has cost me a great deal of trouble to convince them of it.”</p>
			<p>“So then⁠—”</p>
			<p>The banker nodded.</p>
			<p>“And when?”</p>
			<p>“I expect them every minute. They wanted me to show myself here, because my remaining away altogether⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Quite right! Quite true!” said the Councillor. “It is very, very painful⁠—still⁠—I will certainly⁠—under these circumstances⁠—”</p>
			<p>And he made a step towards the cloakroom table.</p>
			<p>“Councillor, you will not,” cried Lübbener, holding fast by his coattail.</p>
			<p>At this moment a tremendous flourish of trumpets sounded in the vestibule. The servants rushed from behind their table to the window. The pretty girls who had been waiting upon the ladies ran past them; “They are coming, they are coming.”</p>
			<p>The two gentlemen had also gone to the window, as the flourish sounded a second time, from long trumpets, which eight men dressed as heralds were blowing on the broad landing of the staircase. They turned their instruments upwards to right and left, as if to summon the assembly from above. And in fact they had scarcely uttered their call for the third time, before the company, who had been prepared beforehand, began to appear.</p>
			<p>A splendid sight, whose magnificence even the Councillor, in spite of his thoughts being full of anxiety and care, could not but allow, whilst the servants broke out into loud cries of admiration; only Herr Lübbener’s grey countenance kept the look of a man who is too much behind the scenes to take much pleasure in the play himself.</p>
			<p>The guests came down the marble stairs from both sides, the width being more than sufficient for two couples at once. The brilliant streams met on the landing, but only to separate again, and swarm down the lower stairs to the vestibule, which already began to fill, whilst the staircase and surrounding passages were still swarming with the gay crowd, which while waiting for the stairs to be free for them, could meanwhile enjoy the brilliant spectacle from above all the longer. Preceded by the trumpeting heralds they paraded the vestibule, which was decorated by Justus’s four statues, and brightly lighted by an immense chandelier and numerous candelabra, while it was divided from the outer hall by splendid columns, till suddenly the great folding-doors were flung open, and, as the trumpets ceased, soft music sounding from within invited to the pleasures of the table.</p>
			<p>“Did you see him?” asked Lübbener, with a grim smile.</p>
			<p>“How could I avoid it?” answered the Councillor, sighing; “with my old friend Baroness Kniebreche on his arm. Wonderful! The man has nerves of steel.”</p>
			<p>“I think you had better come in with me, Councillor,” said Lübbener; “if only for the reason that I suspect you could not get out of the house now.”</p>
			<p>“Do you think so?” said the Councillor, sighing; “then there is really nothing else to be done.”</p>
			<p>And he followed his resolute companion, with anything but a festive countenance, into the vestibule, where they mingled with the last comers, who, now that the ranks had been broken, were pressing most impatiently into the supper-room.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
