<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XI</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-11" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XI</h3>
			<p>The gentlemen, too, had remained but a short time together. Herr von Strummin’s proposal of a rubber of whist before going to bed fell through, as it appeared that with the exception of himself and the Count no one played. Even the cigars offered by the Count found no favour excepting with Herr von Strummin, as the General and the President did not smoke, and Reinhold professed to be the less willing to encroach further on the Count’s kindness, because he must take his departure early the next morning, and would therefore ask permission to take leave of the Count now with many thanks for the hospitality he had experienced. He was anxious to know how the Neptune had stood the gale, and he was certain of finding the ship either still at anchor at Wissow or already at Ahlbeck, where she must return to take up the passengers landed there yesterday.</p>
			<p>The Count hoped that Captain Schmidt, if he really was determined to go, would at any rate make use of one of his carriages; but Reinhold declined the civil offer with equal civility; he was a good walker, and if he took a boat from Ahlbeck would reach Wissow sooner than the carriage could convey him there. He earnestly begged the Count not to disturb himself, and asked the General and Herr von Strummin kindly to make his excuses to the ladies. Herr von Strummin exclaimed that the ladies would be inconsolable, and would have further dilated on the subject in his own fashion when a look from the Count showed him that he was on the wrong tack. The General said shortly, as he gave Reinhold his hand, “Au revoir in Berlin, Lieutenant Schmidt!” The President, who had until now kept silence, came up to him at the last moment and whispered, “I wish to speak to you again.”</p>
			<p>Reinhold had got to his room, and was thrusting his unfortunate dress-coat back into his travelling-bag and considering what the President’s mysterious words might mean, when there came a knock at his door. It was Johann, who came to inquire if Captain Schmidt would receive the President for a few minutes? Reinhold sent the servant back to say that he would come at once to receive the President’s commands, and followed him immediately.</p>
			<p>The President received his midnight guest with a cordiality which struck Reinhold the more that till now he had thought that the reserved and rather haughty-looking old gentleman had hardly noticed him. The President must have read Reinhold’s thoughts in his face, for as he invited him to sit by him on the sofa, he said, “I must begin with a confession. It is my habit, nourished and perhaps justified by a long official career, to observe a certain, often I dare say too great, reserve towards all who for the first time come under my notice. But whenever I have good reason for interesting myself in any one my interest is full and entire. You, Captain⁠—or must I, like my worthy friend, call you Lieutenant Schmidt?”</p>
			<p>“Supposing you omit any title, President?”</p>
			<p>“Very well⁠—you, Herr Schmidt, interest me. You are frank and bold by nature, and have fortunately remained so although you have thought and studied and learned more than most members of your profession. However, I am not keeping you from your night’s rest only to make you this very sincere compliment. I have two requests to make of you, of which the first is easy to grant, provided that your expedition after the <i>Neptune</i> is not merely an excuse.”</p>
			<p>“An excuse, President?”</p>
			<p>“You took my side on the harbour question too warmly not to come into collision with the Count, whose sensitiveness on this point is unfortunately only too easy to understand. You would perhaps avoid, for the sake of the rest of the party, a possible continuation of the discussion which puts our host into such an inhospitable temper, and⁠—” The President’s keen eyes shot a rapid glance at Reinhold’s face, as he coughed behind his white hand.</p>
			<p>“That is exactly the state of the case, President,” said Reinhold.</p>
			<p>“I thought so. You will then in a few hours be on board the <i>Neptune</i>. I left lying about in my berth a document which I was studying on the way⁠—a memorial to the Minister upon that very harbour question, and upon the condition of our water-highways, pilotage, coast-beacons⁠—reforms in all these directions⁠—and other matters. I should not like the papers to fall into strange hands even for a time; and you would greatly oblige me⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Thank you heartily for the confidence you put in me, President,” said Reinhold; “the papers shall reach you in safety⁠—”</p>
			<p>“But not before you have looked into them,” interrupted the President quickly. “And this is the prelude to my second request. You look surprised. The matter is simply this. The worthy old Superintendent of pilots at Wissow must, and will, soon retire. The post will be vacant next spring, perhaps even in the course of the winter. In the present state of affairs, with the many questions which are sure to crop up and require attention, the position is one of importance, far exceeding that usually attached to similar posts. I can only propose to the Minister for this post a thoroughly trustworthy and intelligent man, and one of whom I know that he will heartily support my plans from conviction of their propriety. Now if you can find such conviction for yourself in those papers, and would willingly continue the work with me, I would, with your permission, send in your name to the Minister.”</p>
			<p>“Really, President,” said Reinhold, “you offer me such great and flattering confidence, a man of whom you really know nothing⁠—”</p>
			<p>“That is my affair,” interrupted the President, smiling. “The question is now, are you inclined⁠—supposing, of course, that the other circumstances of the position, which are not brilliant, but still sufficient, should suit you⁠—to agree to my proposal? I do not expect, I do not even wish, for any answer at present; I only ask for it when you return the papers to me at Sundin, and we can discuss the matter further over a cutlet and a glass of Burgundy.”</p>
			<p>The President rose. Reinhold felt that he must accede to the wishes of this strange man, and not further pursue the question here or now, and took his leave, expressing his thanks in a few words which came from his heart, and were received by the President with a kindly smile. He had already reached the door when the President called after him:</p>
			<p>“If you like to hand over to my servant anything which might be in your way for your expedition, it shall be carefully looked after among my luggage, and kept as a pledge for my papers.”</p>
			<p>A bow from the aristocratic grey head, a wave of the slender white hand, and Reinhold was dismissed.</p>
			<p>“Very graciously, but very much as if I were already in the Government service and his,” said Reinhold, laughing, as he walked up and down his room, considering the proposal which had come to him so unexpectedly, and yet like the natural sequel to all that had happened in the day. The grounding of the steamer in an uncertain channel; the want of proper signals from the shore; the absence of all precautions in case of need, and principally of a lifeboat; the difficulty, even impossibility, of putting a boat to sea in stormy weather, from that low, unprotected shore⁠—all this had passed through his head. There was so much to be done here! And then that insane project of a harbour, that had been, as it seemed, within a hair’s breadth of being carried out, perhaps might still be carried out, if experienced men did not raise their voices loudly against it, and expose this delusion of the Count’s. The President was right. The position of a Superintendent of pilots in these waters was far more important than might appear at first sight, and was well worthy that a man should give his best strength to it, and sacrifice to it all that he had still hoped and promised to himself from life.</p>
			<p>For a sacrifice it was. His almost completed negotiations with the great Hamburg firm, who had offered him their finest ship for some years to come, for the South American and China trade; his plan of a North Pole expedition, which he had worked out from a completely new point of view, and for which he had already planned and spoken so much, and with such success⁠—such far-reaching views, such important designs to be given up, that he might confine himself to this narrow horizon! to help to prevent this intricate channel from being quite silted up! to organise some useful improvements on this coast; to⁠—⁠</p>
			<p>“Be honest!” said Reinhold, suddenly standing still. “Confess to yourself that it is to avoid putting a few thousand miles between her and you, to remain in her neighbourhood, to have the possibility of seeing her again, to make a fool of yourself as you have done to-day. For it is folly! What good can come of it? This daughter of a general officer, of noble family, would raise her brown eyes with a good deal of astonishment if the very unaristocratic Superintendent of pilots were to venture seriously to lift his eyes to her; and to the General himself I am, and remain, the Lieutenant of the Reserve⁠—something that is neither fish nor flesh, and which one only puts up with in case of necessity, and then very much against the grain. I think I might have known that. And supposing that the most improbable thing in the world did happen, that I could gain the love of this beautiful girl and the friendship of her father, what sort of society should I find myself in in future! How would it please me to be perpetually meeting Count Golm, Herr von Strummin, and Co.? to be always reading in their looks and manners: ‘What does the fellow want amongst us? Can he not remain with his equals? or does he really think that he, or his democratic uncle⁠—’ ” Reinhold could not help laughing. “Uncle Ernst! He had not seen him for ten years; but if he found him again in Berlin⁠—grumbling, bitter, dissatisfied, and apparently impossible to satisfy, as he was formerly⁠—the stubborn old radical and the stern old soldier would make a fine piece of work together! And good Aunt Rikchen, with her anxious little face under her great white cap, and her little mincing steps, how would she get on with the beautiful aristocratic young lady? And his little cousin Ferdinanda⁠—she must by this time be his grown-up cousin, and, if she had kept the promise of her childhood, a very pretty girl. But she might, perhaps, fit in better, although⁠—Have I really gone out of my mind? What is the good of all this? What is it all, but the wildest imagination, of which I ought to be ashamed, of which I shall be ashamed tomorrow! To-morrow? Why it is morning already!”</p>
			<p>He went to the window. It was still dark; the great trees, which seemed to surround the whole house, rustled monotonously, like the rippling of the waves upon a level shore. The sky was completely overcast with black clouds. Reinhold gazed out into the darkness.</p>
			<p>“It would be difficult to steer a straight course here,” he said to himself, “and I have given away my compass. I cannot even find out how I stand. And yet, if but one star appeared, the star of her love, I should know what to do, and would find my way past all rocks and all obstacles!”</p>
			<p>He started with a thrill of joy. As if called by enchantment from the black clouds, directly before him there shone a bright steady light⁠—a star⁠—Venus herself! By the hour and the inclination towards the horizon it could be none other than Venus!</p>
			<p>It was a chance⁠—of course a chance; but he had never been able to laugh at sailors’ superstitions even if he did not share them, and he would not laugh now. No; he would take it as a sign from heaven, as a confirmation of the principle to which he had held as long as he could remember⁠—not with childish self-will to strive after the unattainable, but on a really worthy purpose, attainable by courage and strength and perseverance, to set all his courage, all his strength, and all his perseverance.</p>
			<p>Venus had disappeared in dark clouds, but other stars peeped out; there was a louder rustle in the trees, whose heavy masses began to stand out from the sky⁠—the morning was breaking.</p>
			<p>Reinhold closed the window. He wanted an hour’s repose, and felt that now he could take it. A gentle peace like the lull after a storm had come upon his spirit⁠—he felt that he was himself again, that he had no need to blame or quarrel with himself further, and with fate he had never quarrelled.</p>
			<p>He put out the candles, which had nearly burnt down to their sockets; sank into the great arm-chair which stood before the fire, stared for a few moments at the embers which here and there shone amongst the ashes with a feeble and ever feebler glow, and then fell into a deep and dreamless sleep.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
